Good Breeding

Or Sex and Status in the 23rd Century

An Adaptation of Pride and Prejudice Set on a Colony on Titan in 2270



By Jane Austen and Kelly Inglis



On the arid and sandy moon of a distant planet, a family of Bennet daughters find themselves reenacting an ancient story of misunderstandings, precipitous judgments and mate selection.


Chapter One

It is a truth universally stipulated by the law of every colony on Titan, that a childless man endowed with the management of a good mineshare must be in search of a breeding partner.

However the feelings or views of such a man, he is under the obligation to choose a lass to become the mother of his children within two years of taking up the post.

So familiar is this point of law that, on taking up a mineshare, a childless man is immediately considered the rightful protector of some one or other of the daughters of the surrounding families.

“My dear Bennet Pater,’’ said his co-parent to him one day, “have you heard that Netherfield mine is to be open again at last?”
Bennet Pater replied that he had not.
“But it is,” returned she; “for Llewellyn Mater has just been here, and she told me all about it.” Bennet Pater made no answer. He was engaged in applying sealant to the edges of the windows to sand-proof them in preparation for the upcoming sandstorm. It was a task that had to be repeated almost every week, as the sands were unrelenting in their assaults.
“Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his co-parent impatiently.
“You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.” This was invitation enough.
“Why, my dear, you must know, Llewellyn Mater says that the management of Netherfield has been granted to a young man of large fortune from the East, from New Arabia; that he came down on Moonday in a silver V28 Maxius ferflivver to see the place, and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with Morris Pater immediately; that he is to take possession before the end of the dusty season, and some of his employees are to start preliminary work in the mine by the end of next week.”
“What is his name?”
“Bingley.”
“Is he a father or still without issue?”
“Oh! Without issue, my dear, to be sure! A childless man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”
“How so? How can it affect them?”
“My dear Bennet Pater,’’ replied his co-parent, “how can you be so tiresome! You must know that I am thinking of his choosing one of them as a breeding partner.”
“Is that his design in settling here?”
“Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! His designs are quite beside the point. You know that he must choose a breeding partner if he is to settle here. You must visit him as soon as he comes.”
“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls go, or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for, as you appear as fertile as any of them, he might like you the best of the party.”
“My dear, you flatter me. I certainly may still retain the appearance of fertility, but I am sure he would be able to perceive that I have already bred. When a woman has five grown up daughters, she can no longer indulge in the idle fantasy of further procreation.”
“Indeed, we have made our contribution to the population of this god-forsaken colony. Surely we can rest on our laurels for a little while before scheming on behalf of the next generation.”
“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Squire Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.”
“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”
“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them. Senator and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account, for you know we have so few breeding prospects in the area. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for us to visit him, if you do not.”
“You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Squire Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his breeding with which ever he chooses of the girls; though I must add in a line to dissuade him from fixing on Lizzy.”
“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane nor half so good humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving her the preference.”
“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he; “they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters, and it would be a shame to have that light dimmed too soon by the strictures of motherhood.”
“Bennet Pater, how can you abuse your own children in such way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”
“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.’’
“Ah! You do not now what I suffer. You know that if Lizzy, or indeed any of the girls, fails to find herself a breeding partner before she is thirty, she will be forced to leave Titan. Then what will happen to your darling Lizzy?”
“But she is only twenty-two, my dear, and will live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”
“It will be no use to us if twenty such should come, since you will not visit them.” 
“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty I will visit them all.’’ Bennet Pater was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of five and twenty years had been insufficient to make his co-parent understand his character. Her mind was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper, but she was also a women with a great affection for her daughters and a lively horror of losing them to exile. When she was nervous, her co-parent castigated her for being silly, but no castigation could sooth her nerves. The business of her life was to get her daughters contracted to a suitable breeding partner, the alternative unthinkable, and the eldest already twenty-four.


Chapter Two

Bennet Pater was among the earliest of those who waited on Squire Bingley, making the twenty mile journey on camelback. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring Bennet Mater that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid, she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in embroidering a head scarf, he suddenly addressed her with,
“I hope Squire Bingley will like it, Lizzy, and will take your skill as a testament to your fine genetic heritage.”
“We are not in a way to know what Squire Bingley likes or what standards he uses to judge prospective candidates for motherhood,” said her mother resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”
“But you forget, Mama,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Llewellyn Mater has promised to introduce him.”
“I do not believe Llewellyn Mater will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”
“No more have I,” said Bennet Pater; “and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.”
Bennet Mater deigned not to make any reply; but unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters.
“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty for heaven’s sake! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”
“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times them ill.” 
“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty fretfully.
“It is the dust and the dry air,” said Jane sympathetically. “She was made for a gentler climate.”
“So were we all, but she’s lived on Titan her whole life. She should be used to it by now,” remarked Bennet Pater impatiently.
“Yes,” added Mary, thoughtfully, “And she would be wise not to cough in front of any eligible gentlemen, lest they think her incapable of breeding healthy young.”
Kitty scowled. “I’m sure I shall be a very competent breeder,” she responded.
“When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”
“Tomorrow fortnight.”
“Aye, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Llewellyn Mater does not come back from visiting her paramour till the day before; it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.”
“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Squire Bingley to her.”
“Impossible, Bennet Pater, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?”
“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if we do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, Llewellyn Mater and her nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself.”
The girls stared at their father. Bennet Mater said only, “Nonsense, nonsense!” 
“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?’’ cried he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you there. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great books, and make extracts.” 
Mary strived to say something sensible. “The convention of introductions,” she opined, “allows people to be quickly ascertained of the social status of new acquaintances, so that they need not waste their time making small talk with people of lowly ranks.” 
“Quite so,” her father continued, “Now let us return to Squire Bingley.” 
“I am sick of Squire Bingley,” cried his co-parent.
“I am sorry to hear that; but why did not you tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Bennet Mater perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while.
“How good it was in you, my dear Bennet Pater! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved our girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.”
“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Bennet Pater, “as long as there are no young men about to hear you”; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his co-parent.
“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so  pleasant I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every day; but to save you girls from exile, we would do any thing. Lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Squire Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.”
“Oh! I am not afraid; for though I am the youngest, I am the most robust,” said Lydia stoutly, with a proud swivel of her sturdy child-bearing hips.
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return Bennet Pater’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to dinner.


Chapter Three

Not all that Bennet Mater, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject was sufficient to draw from her co-parent any satisfactory description of Squire Bingley. They attacked him in various ways; with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable.  Senator Weiming had been delighted with him. He was quite young, had a handsome physique that spoke of a good genetic heritage, was extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To engage in dancing is certainly a time-honoured means of evaluating reproductive fitness; and very lively hopes of Squire Bingley’s choice lighting on a local lass were entertained.
“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Bennet Mater to her co-parent, “and all the others with equally good contracts, I shall have nothing to wish for.”
In a few days Squire Bingley returned Bennet Pater’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his den. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young lasses, of whose fecundity he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The lasses were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window, that he wore an azure thobe with gold trim and rode in a handsome two-camel carriage. The white camels against the black sands looked magnificent, posing with the haughty dignity of exquisitely well-bred beasts.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had Bennet Mater planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an email arrived which deferred it all. Squire Bingley was obliged to be in the capital the following day, and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation, &c. Bennet Mater was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in the city so soon after his arrival in Mexistan; and she began to fear that he might be flying about from one place to another, evaluating potential breeding partners throughout the colonies. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to NeoLondon only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Squire Bingley was to bring twelve lasses and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a large number of lasses; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from NeoLondon, his four sisters, an aunt and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly room, it consisted of only five altogether; Squire Bingley, his sister, an aunt and her paramour, and another young man.
Squire Bingley was good looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sister and aunt were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His older sister’s paramour, Hernandez Pater, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Squire Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man and the lasses declared his genetic endowment to be superior even to that of Squire Bingley. He was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company, and above any consideration of local breeding prospects; and not even his management of a large diamond mine could save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend.
Squire Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Squire Darcy danced only once with Squire Bingley’s aunt, Sondakh Mater, and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lass, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst the most violent against him was Bennet Mater, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Squire Darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and Squire Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his friend to join it.
“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. People will think you’re unfit. You had much better dance.”
“I certainly shall not. I don’t care a pebble what people think and you know how I detest it. It is unseemly for a man to take pains to display his genetic quality, and I have no wish to assess the qualifications of any lass here. Your sister is engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with.”
“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a Martian kingdom! Upon my honour I never met with so many pleasant lasses in my life, as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see, uncommonly nubile, and quite brimming with motherly qualities.”
“You are dancing with the only shapely lass in the room,” said Squire Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
“Oh! She is the most fecund and maternal creature I ever beheld! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very nubile, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask Miss Bingley to introduce you.”
“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said, “She is tolerable; but not shapely enough to tempt me; and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young lasses who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your nubile partner  and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”
Squire Bingley followed his advice. Squire Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story however with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in any thing ridiculous.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Bennet Mater had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Squire Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished lass in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. And never had a ball  been so beautiful! The brightly colored saris of the ladies, the elegant linen robes of the gentlemen, the lanterns, the music, the wine...
They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Liqua, the village where they lived, and of which they were the only inhabitants of consequence. They found Bennet Pater still up. With a book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his coparent’s views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear.
“Oh! My dear Bennet Pater,’” as she entered the room, “we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Every body said how healthy she looked; and Squire Bingley thought her fecund and well-grown, and danced with her twice. Only think of that my dear; he actually danced with her twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all: indeed, nobody can, you know, with those skinny hips and lacklustre hair – the perfect embodiment of feeble genes. He seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So, he enquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the jig he danced with Miss Kwame, and the fandango with Maria Lucas, and the jitterbug with Jane again, and the Charleston he danced with Miss Lizzy, and the Quadrille --”
“If he had had any compassion for me,” cried her coparent impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of his partners. Oh! That he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!”
“Oh! My dear,” continued Bennet Mater, “I am quite delighted with him. He is such a paragon of genetic fitness! And his sister and aunt are charming, well-endowed ladies. I never in my life saw any thing more elegant than than the dresses. I dare say the silver embroidery upon Sondakh Mater’s sari --”
Here she was interrupted again. Bennet Pater protested against any description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Squire Darcy.
“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not suiting his fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So high and conceited that there was no enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great! Not nubile enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have given him one of your set downs. I quite detest the man. I hope that the entirety of his fortune is inadequate to persuade a single lass to bear his horrid offspring!”


Chapter 4


When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Squire Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very much she admired him.
“He is just what a young man ought to be,” said she, “sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!”
“His breeding appears to be impeccable,” Elizabeth agreed. “It certainly has endowed him with a robust physique and a handsome countenance.  He is, moreover, very well-established, which a young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. His qualifications are thereby complete.”
“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I did not expect such a compliment.”
“Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between us. Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never. What could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing that you were about five times as fecund as any other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a stupider person.”
“Dear Lizzy!”
“Oh! You are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life.”
“I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak what I think.”
“I know you do; and it is that which makes the wonder. With your good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others! Does it never bother you, Jane, that these men you find so charming only want us for our wombs?”
“Don’t be absurd, Elizabeth!” retorted Jane. “We are not mere wombs! Yes, they want us for our child-bearing capacities, but that alone is not all we have to offer. They also prize us for our superior genetics. That is why they care that we are pretty and lively and accomplished. We display our good genes and they know that we could bear them healthy, intelligent children.” Jane reflected with quiet composure on her own excellent breeding potential.
“But what about love?” persisted Elizabeth.
Jane looked puzzled. “But that is love, Lizzy.”
“Is it?” asked Elizabeth. “Is that all there is to love? That’s not how things use to be, in the old days... What if a gentleman evaluated you highly as a mate, decided to breed with you and then discovered that you were barren” (Jane flinched at the vulgarity) “and he wanted to share his life with you anyway. Now that would be love.”
Jane considered the absurd scenario solemnly. “Perhaps,” she said doubtfully, “but that would be romantic love, like paramour love, not co-parenting love,” she said judiciously. “And you know we will have a ample opportunity to experience paramour love some day, when we’re older, after we have bred.”
“But what if you could have paramour love with your breeding partner,” Elizabeth persisted. “Wouldn’t that be sublime?” But even as she spoke these words, Elizabeth understood the impossibility of such a fantasy. Maybe it had been possible once on Earth, but it was not suitable for modern life.
“You have been reading too many ancient Earthan books, Lizzy,” Jane responded. “You know that’s not reality. Reality is co-parenting love, children, and then maybe paramour love, if we live long enough. But that’s far in the future. For now, why not allow us to delight in the admiration of handsome men that might want us to have their babies?” she coaxed. “Like the very charming Squire Bingley...”
“Well he does have very nice manners,” Elizabeth conceded, “and his pedigree is immaculate. Moreover, he seems like a man that would treat you well…
“But tell me,” she continued. “Do you like this man’s sister and aunt, too? Their manners are not equal to his.”
“Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her.”
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and conceited.  They had the good fortune of being so well-connected that they would certainly be able to receive a dispensation to stay on Titan even if they did not find breeding partners, and coupled with that security was the unlikelihood of such an eventuality ever arising. Nature had been kind, amplying endowing them with secondary sexual characteristics that advertised their superior genetics, and they had the additional advantage of being able to supplement nature with artifice, having access to all the hair lotions, skin creams, spa treatments and cosmetics that Titan had to offer. The happy result was a superabundance of fertility signals. To complete their conspicuous superiority, they enjoyed a stunning collection of sarongs and saris to set off their shapely figures. They were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They owed their many advantages to their membership in a respectable family in New Arabia; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother’s fortune (and thus the source of their own protection) had been acquired by a swashbuckling adventurer and bioengineer.
Their great-grandfather had been exiled from Earth in circumstances that the family had chosen not to remember, but by good fortune his skills as a bioengineer had enabled him to join the pioneering project of terraforming Titan. He had been instrumental in the decision to terraform Titan just sufficiently as to allow human habitation in the equatorial zone, a 3000 mile strip girdling the moon that resembled an earthan desert, although the sand was composed of black hydrocarbon instead of silicon. After terraforming, this habitable zone was as hot as the Sahara, though surrounded by the frozen bulk of Titan on all sides, and the string of settlements within it was sufficient to provide a base for the exploitation of Titan’s precious metal and gem mines.  As a consequence of great-grandfather Bingley’s parsimonious calculations, life was rather primitive on Titan’s desert surface, but the mines made a fortune for some and a living for the rest. As one of the founding fathers, the Bingley ancestor had been granted the first copper mine on Titan and had managed it with scientific efficiency. His sons supplemented his legacy with diamond and ruby mines.
Squire Bingley had inherited property in the amount of nearly a hundred thousand platinums from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate on earth’s moon, but did not live to do so. Squire Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes even considered the possibility of buying a residency on Earth itself; but as he was now provided with a good mineshare and the liberty of the attached manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days on Titan, and leave the next generation the option of returning to the old world.
His sisters relied on his staying on Titan. It is doubtful that funds could have been found to purchase residencies for all of them on Earth, and if their brother left Titan, they could no longer rely on his protection. They would face the threat that gave all unpartnered women on Titan uneasy nights – the possibility of being exiled from Titan and forced to look for a position, as breeding partner, laborer or whore, on one of the newer, more remote and distinctly more primitive moon colonies of Jupiter, such as Callisto or Ganymede.
Although Bingley’s sisters would never admit to any anxiety regarding their ability to find suitable breeding partners, and hence secure their positions on Titan, they were nevertheless eager to make colonial life comfortable and attractive to their brother.
Now that Squire Bingley had secured a mineshare at Netherfield, Miss Bingley was pleased to preside at his table—and his aunt, Sondakh Mater, whose breeding years were behind her and whose children had reached an degree of independence that enabled her to pursue romantic liasions, was no less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her, often bringing a paramour with her. Squire Bingley had not been of age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield mine. He did look at it, and into it for half-an-hour--was pleased with its prospects, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and accepted the position immediately.
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though polished, were not inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually giving offense.
The manner in which they spoke of the Mandalay assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or more promising breeding prospects in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he had never met a woman more suitable to bear his children. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest in forming a breeding arrangement or even in engaging in conversation, and from none received either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be nubile, and quite likely a suitable co-parent for Bingley, but she smiled too much.
Sondakh Mater and her niece allowed it to be so--but still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet lass, and one whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore established as a sweet lass, and Squire Bingley felt authorized by such commendation to consider her qualifications for motherhood.


Chapter 5

Within a short ride of Liqua lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Senator Weiming Lucas had been formerly the manager of a small tungsten mine in Mandalay, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of an appointment to the Colony senate. The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small mining town; and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about ten miles from Mandalay, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own importance; and since the duties of the Senate were light, consisting primarily of efficiently sanctioning the decisions of the heriditary governors, he had ample leisure to devote himself in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his position, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his appointment to the Senate had made him courteous.
Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Bennet Mater. They had several children. The eldest of them had been unable to find a breeding partner and was exiled to Ganymede, though her family did not dare to ask how she made a living there. The second eldest, a sensible, intelligent young woman of about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth’s intimate friend.
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Liqua to hear and to communicate.
“You  began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Bennet Mater with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. You were Squire Bingley’s first choice.”
“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”
“Oh! You mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be sure that did seem as if he admired her qualifications—indeed I rather believe he did—I heard something about it—but I hardly know what—something about Squire Rubenstein.”
 “Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Squire Rubenstein; did not I mention it to you? Squire Rubenstein’s asking him how he liked our Mandalay assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many nubile women in the room, and which he thought the shapeliest and his answering immediately to the last question: ‘Oh! The eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed—that does seem as if—but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”
“My overhearings were more to the purpose than yours, Eliza,” said Charlotte. “Squire Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he?—poor Eliza!—to be only just tolerable.”
“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Llewellyn Mater told me last night that he sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.”
“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much, unless among his intimate acquaintances. With them he is remarkably agreeable.”
“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Llewellyn Mater. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eaten up with pride, and I dare say he had heard somehow that Llewellyn Mater does not keep a ferflivver, or even a camel, and had to travel the twenty miles to the ball in a llama cart.”
“I do not mind his not talking to Llewellyn Mater,” said Miss Lucas, “but I wish he had danced with Eliza.”
“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with him, if I were you.”
“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you never to dance with him.”
“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend me so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune and impeccable genetics, should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a right to be proud.”
“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive his pride, if he had not mortified mine.”
“Pride,” observed Mary, who preened herself upon the solidity of her reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that the urge to obtain status among one’s conspecifics, and to defend such status once achieved, is very common indeed throughout the animal kingdom and that humans are particularly prone to it.  Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our intellectual or social status within a community, vanity to the need to attract suitable mates.”
“If I were as rich as Squire Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a houseful of domestic robots, have a fleet of ferflivvers and gyrocopters, and play war games in my holodeck all day long.”
“Oh what I would give for even one domestic robot,” sighed Bennet Mater wistfully.
“But as to spending all day in a holodeck,” she cried, turning to the boy, “I’m sure you would be immersed in fantasy a great deal more than you ought to be,” said Bennet Mater; “and if I were to see you at it, I should lock up your holodeck directly.”
The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she would, and the argument ended only with the visit.


Chapter 6

The ladies of Liqua soon called on those of Netherfield. The visit was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with them was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; even their kindness to Jane, such as it was, arose in all probability from the influence of their brother’s admiration. On the one hand, they could scarcely afford to offend their fraternal protector, and on the other hand, a breeding partner would solidify Squire Bingley’s ties to Titan and reduce the likelihood of his abandoning his sisters to the vagaries of this desperate desert society. It was generally evident whenever they met, that Squire Bingley did admire her and to Elizabeth it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent. Until everything was settled, it behooved Jane to be discreet in her feelings, in case Squire Bingley should unaccountably decide that another woman would make a better mother to his children. As open and artless as Jane was, Elizabeth knew that it would be severely damaging to her future prospects of partnering well if it came to be known that she had loved and been rejected by another man. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.
“It may perhaps be prudent,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark.  There is so much vanity in men, that even when choosing a breeding partner and not a paramour, a man cannot help but to be influenced by a lass’s admiration for himself. And then, of course,” she reflected further, “there is a superstition among men that a breeding partner who is initially in love with them is less likely to stray before the end of her breeding years, possibly incurring an illegitimate conception...”
“Don’t be absurd,” said Elizabeth sharply. “No woman on Titan would dare to stray before the end of her breeding years! If an illegitimate baby were conceived, her infidelity would be detected immediately upon its first prenatal DNA analysis, whereupon she’d be thrown off the Colony and left to her own devices.” Elizabeth shivered. “No one would dare.”
“Yes, of course,” said Charlotte in a conciliatory tone. “We know that and so do they, but it is nevertheless a kind of ancient superstition among them.  There are very few of men who have heart enough to enter into a breeding arrangement without harboring the belief that a woman is truly in love with them. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show more affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never commit to a breeding partnership, if she does not help him on.”
“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to discover it too.”
“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”
“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal it, he must find it out.”
“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses.”
“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in question but the desire of being well partnered, and if I were determined to get a breeding partner with a good establishment, or in a desperate plight to attract any breeding partner at all, I dare say I should adopt it. But these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design, and she has many years before desperation sets in. As yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four dances with him at Mandalay; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.”
“Not as you represent it. Had she merely dined with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four evenings may do a great deal.”
“Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like the blues better than Mozart and dungeons and dragons better than go; that they are both reasonably intelligent but not intellectual, healthy and in possession of good genes, and rather more good-natured than may be wise, but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”
“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she were to enter into a breeding contract with him tomorrow, I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a tenmonth. Happiness in co-parenting arrangements is entirely a matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least. After a short period of blissful cohabitation, she will become entirely immersed in the business of motherhood and he will begin to take paramours. They will continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards that by the time she is eligible to take a paramour of her own, the relationship will have become so detached as to be able to continue in civil cooperation unfettered by passion. Outside the realm of genetics, it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to breed.”
“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”
“Well, you are twenty-two and Jane is twenty-four, and you both exude fecundity. You have the leisure to be romantic and finicky in your choice. I am twenty-seven and rapidly losing what nubility I have ever possessed. I have but three years to find myself a partner and I have already lost one sister to exile. I consider, therefore, that pragmatism is an appropriate principle for me to adopt.”
Occupied in observing Bingley’s attentions to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be nubile; he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her nubile enough to dance with.
He was aware that it would be perverse for him to develop a romantic interest in a lass who had not yet bred, and with whom, moreover, he could never consider entering into a breeding partnership. In spite of the faint suspicion that he may be entertaining inappropriate feelings, however, he began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Senator Weiming Lucas’s, where a large party were assembled.
“What does Squire Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my conversation with Colonel Forster?”
“That is a question which Squire Darcy only can answer.”
“But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”
On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said:
“Did you not think, Squire Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was importuning Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Mandalay?”
“With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lass energetic.”
“You are severe on us.”
“It will be her turn soon to be importuned,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”
“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If I had chosen to develop a musical talent as a way advertising the fitness of my genes, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however, she added, “Very well, if it must be so, it must.”
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the least nubile lass in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, and was always impatient for display. Not being endowed with the shapeliness of her sisters, Mary’s only hope was to attract a man who valued the possibility of intelligent children over the probability of robust ones. After all, although life on Titan was physically demanding, and the prospect of frail children understandably abhored, intelligence was always an advantage. With full understanding of the precariousness of her position even at the tender age of eighteen, she was motivated to work hard at the acquisition of accomplishments that could advertise her less apparent genetic gifts and eagerly seized occasions for demonstrating them.
Squire Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Senator Weiming Lucas was his neighbour, till Senator Lucas thus began:
“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Squire Darcy! There is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first refinements of polished society.”
“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.”
Senator Lucas smiled. “Yes, but what better and more pleasing way of discerning the relative genetic endowments of young people! Whether savage or sophisticate, the best dancers must draw on considerable internal resources of intelligence, agility and dexterity. Truly, as they say, good dancers make good parents.”
“Your friend performs delightfully,” he continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Squire Darcy.”
“You saw me dance at Mandalay, I believe, sir.”
“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do you often dance at St. James’s?”
“Never, sir.”
“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”
“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”
“You have a house in the city, I conclude?”
Squire Darcy bowed.
“I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of NeoLondon would agree with Lady Lucas. She is sensitive to the high levels of cadmium there.”
He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her:
“My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Squire Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lass to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to give this young lass a chance to display her nubility.”
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Squire Darcy who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Senator Lucas:
“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”
Squire Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Senator Lucas at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it would be a shame to miss this opportunity to display your shapeliness and grace to this room of potential fathers; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us for one half-hour.”
“Squire Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.
“He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such a partner?”
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:
“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”
“I should imagine not.”
“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise—the nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”
“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the important role a pair of fine eyes in the face of a nubile lass has in a thorough assessment of genetic quality.”
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lass had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Squire Darcy replied with great intrepidity:
“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”
“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment. How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish you joy?”
“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to breeding arrangements, from breeding arrangements to children, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”
“Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is absolutely settled. Your children  will have a charming grandmother, indeed; and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you.”
He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed long.



Chapter 7

Bennet Pater’s living was derived almost entirely from a position as a law clerk worth five hundred a year, which would scarcely be enough to keep his family in comfort, were it not for a modest but agreeable home inherited from a distant relation. Unfortunately, given that he had no sons, there was no one in the family to inherit the property or earn a living after his death. That his daughters secured good breeding contracts, therefore, was essential not only to their continued existence on Titan but even to the shelter and sustainance of Bennet Mater after the demise of her co-parent.

The village of Liqua was only ten miles from Mandalay; a most convenient distance for the young lasses to travel by llama, and they were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a boutique just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions; their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing better offered, a trip to Mandalay was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news the colony in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of an aeronautical regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole of the dusty season, as planetary exploration for new mining sites would have to wait until the sand storms had quite passed.

Their visits to Phillips Mater were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the astronauts’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the astronauts themselves. Phillips Pater visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but astronauts; and Squire Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the devilish gallantry of an astronaut.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Bennet Pater coolly observed:

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the Colony. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced.”

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to NeoLondon.

“I am astonished, my dear,” said Bennet Mater, “that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

“Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.”

“My dear Bennet Pater, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother. What would it profit them to be serious? Of course, they ought to wait until they are closer to my age before dreaming of dalliances with astronauts. I like an explorer myself very well, and if a smart young colonel should show an interest, I shall not say nay to him. I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Senator Lucas’s...” Bennet Mater trailed off dreamily and then recovered herself. “But, indeed, there are some astronauts that have not yet become fathers and may be interested in one of my girls as a breeding partner. In such a case, liveliness of spirits will answer better to their genetic quality than a solemn demeanor.”

Bennet Pater was about to take issue with Bennet Mater regarding the desirability of astronauts as co-parents, when Jane announced the arrival of an email from Netherfield. Bennet Mater’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,

“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”

“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.

“MY DEAR FRIEND,--

“If you are not so compassionate as to dine today with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day’s tete-a-tete between two ladies can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the astronauts.--Yours ever,

“CAROLINE BINGLEY”

“With the astronauts!” cried Lydia. “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of that.”

“Dining out,” said Bennet Mater, “that is very unlucky.”

“Can I have the ferflivver?” said Jane.

“No, my dear, you had better go on llamaback because it seems likely to storm; and then you must stay all night.”

“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home before the storm hits.”

“Oh! But the gentlemen will have Squire Bingley’s ferflivver to go to Mandalay.”

“I had much rather go in the ferflivver.”

“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the fuel, I am sure. You are very low on resources are you not, Bennet Pater?”

“I am always low on resources, and I would that you were always so frugal.”

Jane was therefore obliged to go on llamaback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before the wind picked up. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The wind and sand swirled continually the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Bennet Mater more than once, as if the credit of making a sandstorm were all her own. Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when the following email arrived for Elizabeth:

“MY DEAREST LIZZY,--

“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be imputed to my breathing in too much sand and dust yesterday. My kind friends will not hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Dr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the matter with me.--Yours, etc.”

“Well, my dear,” said Bennet Pater, when Elizabeth had read the note aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Squire Bingley, and under your orders.”

“Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of trifling respiratory ailments. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the ferflivver.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though the ferflivver was not to be had; camelback was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a thing, in all this sand and wind! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there.”

“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to release the ferflivver?”

“No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the ride. The distance is nothing when one has a motive; only twenty miles, and the storm is still in its early stages. I shall be back by dinner.”

It was a dusty but invigorating ride on an animal so well genetically modified to Titan’s harsh climate that it could cover the twenty miles in less than two hours, undeterred by the thick clouds of sand that rendered it completely blind and forced it to rely on Elizabeth’s guidance. The challenge for Elizabeth of interpreting GPS readings and guiding the camel, all the while breathing through a filtration headscarf and attempting not be be unseated by the sandy wind, left her flushed with joyful triumph when at last she reached Netherfield.

She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have ridden twenty miles so early in the day, in such frightful weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in Squire Bingley’s manners there was something better than politeness; there was good humour and kindness. Squire Darcy said very little, and Hernandez Pater nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her.

When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The doctor came, and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had developed bronchitis, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the ferflivver, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the ferflivver to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented.



Chapter 8


At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Squire Bingley’s, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a respiratory infection, how excessively they disliked being ill and how lucky they were that they were so rarely ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Squire Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Hernandez Pater, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink and make love to Sondakh Mater.
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she had no conversation, no style and very deficient secondary sexual characteristics. Sondakh Mater thought the same, and added:
“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent rider. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.”
“She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must she be scampering about the desert, because her sister had bronchitis? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!”
“Yes, and her sari; I hope you saw her sari, the silk grazed and ripped from the assault of the sand; and the robes which had been supposed to protect it not doing their office.”
“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning. Her sand-scarred sari quite escaped my notice.”
“You observed it, Squire Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see your sister make such an exhibition.”
“Certainly not.”
“To  ride ten miles, or fifteen miles, or twenty miles, or whatever it is, through a sandstorm, quite alone! What could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, an ill-bred indifference to decorum.”
“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said Bingley.
“I am afraid, Squire Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, “that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.”
“Not at all,” he replied; “they were brightened by the exercise.” A short pause followed this speech, and Sondakh Mater began again:
“I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very sweet lass, though I hope her health is not always so delicate. I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such unhealthy connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it.”
“I think I have heard you say that she has a cousin with flat feet.” 
“Yes; and they have another, with asthma.”
“That is capital,” added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
“If they had enough sickly cousins to fill a hospital,” cried Bingley, “it would not make them one jot less fit.”
“But it must very materially lessen their chance of forming breeding contracts with any men of consideration in the world,” replied Darcy. “They may exhibit a phenotype of good health, but what deleterious recessive genes may be lurking in their genotypes?”
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend’s imperfect relations.
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole party at poker, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing for high stakes she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Hernandez Pater looked at her with astonishment.
“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.” 
“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.” 
“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I am not a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.” 
“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well.” Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others—all that his library afforded.
“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into.”
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Squire Darcy!”
“It ought to be good,” he replied, “it has been the work of many generations.” 
“It is a charming, but peculiar, object for a family collection,” she continued. “It is so much more convenient to read on a computer. And it is not as though you need to conserve battery cells!” 
“I prefer reading real books. The leather and pulp transport me to an earlier, more authentic age.” 
Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Squire Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.
“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the clear season?” said Miss Bingley; “will she be as tall as I am?”
“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or somewhat taller, and rather well-developed too.”
“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such a shapely body, such manners! And so extremely accomplished for her age! Her performance on the violin is exquisite.”
“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young lasses can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are.”
“All young lasses accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?” 
“Yes, all of them, I think. They all build furniture, breed chickens, and grow herbs. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.”
 “Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has too much truth. The word is applied to many a potential breeding partner who deserves it no otherwise than by building a chair or seasoning a dish. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of lasses in general. I cannot boast of knowing no more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really accomplished.” 
“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.
“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished candidate for motherhood.”
“Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.”
“Oh! Certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really be qualified for motherhood who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, and dancing,  and an understanding of theoretical physics and practical biology to deserve the word; and besides all this, she must possess the physical grace and verbal eloquence that emerge naturally from good health and intelligence, or the word will be but half-deserved.”
“All this she must possess,” added Darcy, “and to all this she must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.”
“I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six women qualified to breed. I rather wonder now at your knowing any.”
“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?” 
“I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe united.” 
Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Hernandez Pater called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
“Elizabeth Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is one of those young lasses who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”
“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, “there is a meanness in all the arts which lasses sometimes condescend to employ for the purpose of capturing a breeding contract. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.”
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Dr. Jones being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no local advice could be of any service, recommended an express to NeoLondon for one of the most eminent physicians. Privately they hoped that a specialist would be able to enlighten them as to whether the present illness of Miss Bennet could have a genetic component. Jane would not hear of allowing such an extravagence; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled that Dr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by paying every attention to the sick lass and her sister.


Chapter 9

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Squire Bingley. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested permission to email an invitation to her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgment of her situation, now that the dust storm was in temporary abeyance. The plan was acceded to and the invitation sent. Bennet Mater, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Bennet Mater would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried home; neither did the doctor, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Bennet Mater had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.
“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Dr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness.”
“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. We will not hear of her removal.”
 “You may depend upon it, Madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, “that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while she remains with us.” 
Bennet Mater was profuse in her acknowledgments.
“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends I do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her. You have a sweet room here, Squire Bingley, and a charming robot staff, so elegant and efficient. I do not know any other place in the area that has specialized butler, housekeeper and cook units. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though your contract is yet provisional.”
“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”
“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth.
“You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards her.
“Oh! Yes—I understand you perfectly.”
“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful.”
“That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”
“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”
“I did not know before,” continued Bingley immediately, “that you were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”
“Yes, but intricate characters are the most amusing. They have at least that advantage.”
 “The outer colonies,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study. In a remote neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.”
 “But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever.” 
“Yes, indeed,” cried Bennet Mater, offended by his manner of mentioning a remote neighbourhood. 
“I assure you there is quite as much of that going on in an outer colony as in the city.” Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away.  Bennet Mater, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph.
“I cannot see that NeoLondon has any great advantage over the outer colonies, for my part, except the shops and public places. The air is a vast deal pleasanter, is it not, Squire Bingley without the sulpherous vapors and particulates of the city?”
“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”
“Aye—that is because you have the right disposition. But that gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think Mexistan Was nothing at all.”
“Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother. “You quite mistook Squire Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in an outer colony as in the city, which you must acknowledge to be true.”
“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towards Squire Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Liqua since her coming away.
“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Senator Lucas is, Squire Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So genteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. That is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.”
“Did Charlotte dine with you?”
“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the llama kebabs. For my part, Squire Bingley, any one of my daughters is quite competent in providing a meal without requiring the whole family to lend a hand. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are very good sort of lasses, I assure you. It is a pity they do not exude fecundity! Not that I think Charlotte so very scrawny—but then she is our particular friend.”
“She seems a very pleasant young woman.”
“Oh! Dear, yes; but you must own she is very scrawny. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me Jane’s fecundity. I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane—one does not often see anybody better designed for motherhood. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother Gardiner’s in town so much in taken with her that my brother’s breeding partner was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. He did get so far as to initiate an examination into their genetic compatibility, though, I understand.”
Her mother was innocently flattered that the man’s estimation of Jane had reached this advanced stage of consideration, but Elizabeth was mortified that Darcy might conclude that the man had found something wrong with Jane’s genetic constitution.
“And then he met another who suited him better,” said Elizabeth impatiently.
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Bennet Mater began repeating her thanks to Squire Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Squire Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part indeed without much graciousness, but Bennet Mater was satisfied, and soon afterwards spoke of fetching her llama cart. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax Squire Bingley with having promised on his first coming into their colony to give a ball at Netherfield.
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention of the astronauts had increased into assurance. She was very equal, therefore, to address Squire Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother’s ear:
“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.”
Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh! Yes—it would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Mandalay again. And when you have given your ball,” she added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”
Bennet Mater and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Squire Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her, in spite of all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on fine eyes.


Chapter 10

The day passed much as the day before had done. Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The poker-table, however, did not appear. Squire Darcy was on his laptop, writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Hernandez Pater and Squire Bingley were playing go, and Sondakh Mater was observing their game.
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady, either on his computer, or on the facility of his typing, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in union with her opinion of each.
“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!” He made no answer.
“You type uncommonly fast.”
“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”
“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”
“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.” 
“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”
“I have already told her so once, by your desire.” 
“You have a very elegant laptop.” He was silent.
“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the violin; and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley’s.”
“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have not time to do them justice.”
“Oh! It is of no consequence. I shall see her in Primember. But do you always write such charming long letters to her, Squire Darcy?”
“They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me to determine.” 
“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannot write ill.” 
“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her brother, “because he does not write with ease. He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?” 
“My style of writing is very different from yours.” 
“Oh!” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and misspells the rest.” 
“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them—by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.” 
“Your humility, Squire Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.” 
“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.” 
“And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?” 
“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. You are far too concerned with capturing the imagination of your intimate social circle and rather too little for matters of greater objective significance.” 
“And what, pray, are these significant mattters that my vanity leads me to neglect?” said Bingley, with more curiousity than heat.
“Such things as your duties as a mineowner, the well-being of your fellow man, and the smooth functioning of the Colony.”
“I must be vain indeed to be neglectful of so much!” retorted Bingley with an injured tone.
“On the whole, I would say that you take your duties with adequate seriousness,” Darcy replied. “But when temptation calls, you are over apt to be impetuous and even thoughtless. When you told Bennet Mater this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself—and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitousness which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”
“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitousness merely to show off before the ladies.”
“I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity, even when convinced of the merit of your journey. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on whim as that of any man I know; and if, as you were entering your ferflivver to travel to a conference on mine management, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay till next week,’ you would probably not go—and at another word, might stay a month.”
“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Squire Bingley has an affectionate heart and that he prizes the needs of his friends over the demands of business.”
“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and fly off as fast as I could.”
“Yes,” said Darcy “If you were once of the belief that attending this conference would make you a better manager, thereby benefiting your workers, their families, this town and, by extention, the success of this Colony, then I do think you should maintain your intended course, even in the face of a friend’s importunity.”
“I believe you wrong me here, Darcy” said Bingley, thoughtfully, “If I were convinced of the value of the conference, and yet wished to accede to my friend’s desires, I would commission my under-manager to go in my stead. I am sure that I am not the only man in my mine who could benefit from further industrial education.”
“Well spoken,” returned Elizabeth. “The reasonableness of your solution is a testament to both your modesty and your ability to compromise. Modesty and Compromise, I venture, are concepts with which Darcy has had little acquaintance.”
Squire Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh.
Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received and called for an end to the argument.
“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Squire Darcy had much better finish his letter.”
Squire Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity to the positronic organ; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself.
Sondakh Mater sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Squire Darcy’s eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of consideration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation.
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm with a lively Martian air; and soon afterwards Squire Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her:
“Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?”
She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.
“Oh!” said she, “I heard you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’ that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all—and now despise me if you dare.”
“Indeed I do not dare.”
Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any lass as he was by her. He feared, that were it not for his conscious subjection to the social mores of Titan, he should be in some danger of developing a scandalous attraction to an innocent girl, a lass who has not even began to breed.
Miss Bingley saw or suspected enough to believe that Darcy was considerating Elizabeth’s potential as a co-parent; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed breeding contract, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together the next day in the glade of elephant trees that graced the grounds of Netherfield, “that your children will not take after your partner’s mother, when this desirable event takes place, and do not inherit Jane’s ill-health, or Charlotte’s cough, and miraculously avoid all of the other imperfections that that haunt that unfortunate family.”
“Have you anything else to propose for my paternal felicity?” 
“Oh! Yes! Do try to find out why the happy family consists solely of girls. Very odd, is it not?” 
The oddness of this circumstance had not escaped Darcy’s attention, but, as there was no possibility of his condescending to breed with Elizabeth, he paid no attention to it. Even the inappropriate inclinations that occasionally wormed their way into his consciousness were romantic and not co-parental. 
“They are, however, all remarkably nubile and fecund lasses,” he replied.
At that moment they were met from another walk by Sondakh Mater and Elizabeth herself.
“I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been overheard.
“You used us abominably ill,” answered Sondakh Mater, “running away without telling us that you were coming out.”
Then taking the disengaged arm of Squire Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just admitted three. Squire Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said:
“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue.” 
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered: “No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque? would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye.” 
She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.

Chapter 11

When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and after ensuring that her filtration headscarf protected her throat and lungs from dust, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Hernandez Pater also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad”; but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half-hour was spent in inspecting the sealant along the edges of the windows, lest any tiny flaws should allow dust or sand into the room; and she removed at his desire to the other side of the room, that she might be further from the windows. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.
When tea was over, Hernandez Pater reminded his paramour’s niece of the card-table—but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Squire Darcy did not wish for cards; and Hernandez Pater soon found even his open petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Hernandez Pater had therefore nothing better to do than to invite Sondakh Mater upstairs for a little early evening dalliance. Miss Bingley watched them leave with a sigh, wondering if co-parental relations would bear any resemblance to paramour love, or whether she would have to wait nearly two decades for such delights.
Miss Bingley turned her attention to an admiration of Darcy’s progress through his book; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with a book of her own, which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I am ensconced in a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library.”
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said:
“By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure.”
“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins—but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing.”
“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day. After all, intelligence and sensibility are more important qualities to look for in a breeding partner than physical grace.”
“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much like a ball. Besides, even the best sets of genes require a healthy body to realize their transmission to the next generation.”
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said:
“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude.”
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Squire Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere. “What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his meaning?”—and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?
“Not at all,” was her answer; “but depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it.”
Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Squire Darcy in anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives.
“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can assess you much better as I sit by the window.”
“We have nothing to gain by displaying our well-shaped figures to you,” replied Elizabeth. “We all know that you have higher standards for the mother of your future children.”
“I have high standards, yes,” said Darcy. “It would be neglectful of me not to want the best for my children. Especially when I am fortunate enough to be in a position to provide the best.”
Miss Bingley looked dismayed.
“But I am sure that both of you will make excellent mothers,” he concluded with an belated attempt at gallantry.
“Now that you have reminded us of your very privileged position, Squire Darcy, I would like to ask your opinion on a political matter,” said Elizabeth.
“Yes?”
“Do you think it is time for Titan to become a democracy?” 
Darcy considered the question thoughtfully. “Democracy is a beautiful concept,” he said judiciously, “but the realities of life on Titan require a technocracy. The brightest and best educated minds on this planet are already fully occupied in tending to the challenges of making an alien environment hospitable to human life. We would be completely undone if the uneducated masses to were elect a charismatic dunce to direct our operations.” 
“Then education, surely, is the key.”
“Ultimately, yes,” Darcy replied. “Ultimately we would like a genetically healthy, intelligent and well-educated populace that could be trusted with deciding the fate of Titan. But at the moment, we don’t have the resources to provide the necessary education to everyone. We need men to work in the mines and women to raise children.”
“But don’t you think that if women were to devote more of their energy to educating themselves, they would be better able to educate their children, thereby making each successive generation of Titan closer to that ideal that you envision?”
Darcy looked surprised.
“I do think that,” he said. “That is why I think the accomplishments of a good mother should extend far beyond useful skills such as furniture design and human biology, to include an understanding of history, literature, philosophy and science.”
“So you don’t think that women’s accomplishments are solely valuable as a means to display superior genes?”
“No,  in fact, I don’t. That they effectively display superior genes is indisputable, but women also have a role to play in making our society better.”
“Spoken like a true politician.”
“You mistake me. I am not a politician. Due to our freedom from the democratic process here in Titan, we who are entrusted to manage society do not have to be politicians. We may concentrate on being technocrats.”
“And why can’t women be technocrats? At least after they have fulfillled their child-raising duties?”
Darcy smiled. “I am sure that some women could make very competent technocrats,” he said, regarding Elizabeth with warm respect, “Unfortunately for those of your sex with such ambitions, men have the power, and those with power rarely give it up voluntarily.”
“You mean some men have the power. And that privileged few is unlikely to relinquish it.”
“Exactly.”
“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa,” she called to her aunt who had just come down the stairs looking quite invigorated, “you will not mind playing for us?”
Sondakh Mater had not the smallest objection, and the positronic organ was opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.


Chapter 12

In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to their mother, to beg that the ferflivver might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Bennet Mater, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Zeusday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before then. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Bennet Mater sent them word that they could not possibly have the ferflivver before Zeusday, as her father had taken it for a few days to visit his occasional paramour; and in her postscript it was added, that if Squire Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved—nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Squire Bingley’s ferflivver immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her—that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.
To Squire Darcy it was welcome intelligence—Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked—and he was much afraid that Miss Bingley might begin to suspect the inappropriate nature of his feelings, which had nothing to do with the rational evaluation of a potential breeding partner. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of romantic inclination should now escape him, and equally that nothing could inspire Elizabeth to believe that he may be reconsidering her qualifications as a co-parent; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturnsday, and though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Liqua or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Bennet Mater wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would suffer a relapse of her respiratory ailment. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of animal and human nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations to listen to, concerning the mating displays of peacocks and the courtship dances of jumping spiders.
“Isn’t it odd,” remarked Kitty, “that in the animal kingdom it is the males that display, but among people is it the lasses that need to strut their stuff?”
“Oh, that is not odd at all,” Mary said condescendingly. “In species in which the female is capable of caring for the young by herself, female choice dictates mate selection. She has the power and can afford to choose only the sexiest mates. But in human society (or at least in our society), the female depends on the male to provide for the young, and even for herself. In that case, the man can be choosy, but the woman must be satisfied with any man that can offer her a living.”
“A woman can still choose among suitable candidates, though,” objected Elizabeth.
“Yes,” said Mary, reluctantly. “If she is attractive enough as a breeding partner to have a selection of offers to choose from,” and she sighed, as she thought darkly of her own prospects in that regard.
Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said at the aeronautical base since the preceding Watersday; several of the astronauts had dined lately with their uncle, one astronaut had been killed in an exploratory mission, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to choose a breeding partner.


Chapter 13

“I hope, my dear,” said Bennet Pater to his co-parent, as they were at breakfast the next morning, “that you are planning a good dinner today, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”
“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in—and I hope my dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”
“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.” 
Bennet Mater’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Squire Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Squire Bingley. But—good Lord! How unlucky! There is not a bit of ostrich to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, run out and see how the baby llamas are faring. Perhaps we could spare one.” 
“It is not Squire Bingley,” said her co-parent; “it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my life.” 
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his co-parent and his five daughters at once.
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained: “About a month ago I received this email, which I have printed out for your amusement; and about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from the pastor of Hanoi, Reverend Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.” 
“Oh! My dear,” cried his co-parent, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be taken away from your own children and granted to the church! And just because we have no sons! How could we be so unfortunate as to have had only daughters!” 
Bennett Pater listened patiently. He was aware that she knew as well as himself why they had never been able to have sons, but he also understood that she preferred to think of it  as a matter of inexplicable bad luck.
“It certainly is most unfortunate,” said Bennet Pater, “and nothing can clear Reverend Collins from the guilt of being the benefactor of his church’s good fortune. But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.”
“No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I don’t know how he can bear to speak to the family that he is expecting to dispossess.”
“Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some scruples on that head, as you will hear.” “Hanoi, near Wellington, Darwin, 15th Octember.
“Dear Sir,—
“The position of the law forbidding ownership of property by women has always given me much uneasiness, particularly in a case where there are no sons to inherit. I have frequently spoken out against this policy, but to no avail. Of course, my position of pastor in the Holy Eugenical Church does not allow me the liberty of choosing where I will live, and when the time comes, I am afraid I will be forced to take occupancy of Liqua.—’There, Bennet Mater.’—My fate is now determined on the subject, for having received ordination at the Festival of Fertility, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, formerly Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Holy Eugenical Church. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the occupancy of the Liqua estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends—but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Moonday, Nonember 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the next Saturnsday night, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.—I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your co-parent and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
“WINONO COLLINS”
“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,” said Bennet Pater, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.”
“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him.”
“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.”
Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of baptising and burying his parishioners whenever it were required.
“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out.—There is something very pompous in his style.—And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the occupancy?—We cannot suppose he would help it if he could.—Could he be a sensible man, sir?”
“No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”
“In point of composition,” said Mary, “the letter does not seem defective. And his reservations regarding the equity of gender-based inheritance laws I think are well expressed.”
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to impossible that the reverend should be as dashing as an astronaut, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any profession. As for their mother, Reverend Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which astonished her co-parent and daughters.
Reverend Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Bennet Pater indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Reverend Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-thirty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated before he complimented Bennet Mater on having so fine a family of daughters; said he had heard much of their fecundity, but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in breeding contracts. This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Bennet Mater, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.
“You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so, for else they will be in a desperate situation. Things are settled so oddly.”
“The law may appear draconian on this point, but I hope you appreciate its necessity. Titan is a struggling colony and we just cannot afford to support members of our community that do not contribute to population growth.”
“Ah! Sir, I do indeed appreciate that. But it is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with you, for such things. I know that pastors have little influence with the law-makers.”
“Indeed we do not, madam. We have in fact our own concessions to make. There was a time when our church required its clergy to remain celibate, but we have since come to see that it is more important for us to set a good example in the question of breeding, than to remain aloof and avoid the inevitable emotional ties that result from producing offspring. We are, after all, the Holy Eugenical Church, and thus we can hardly be unaware of the importance of maximizing genetic diversity in Titan. We cannot afford to squander even one poor pastor’s genetic resources. Now, I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to your fair daughters, and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young lasses that I come prepared to admire their nubility. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted—”
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects of Reverend Collins’s admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Bennet Mater’s heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. He admired too the natural ease and apparent affection between Bennet Pater and Bennet Mater and hazarded a conjecture that they were so complementary to each other that they had no need of paramours. But he was set right there by Bennet Mater, who assured him with some asperity that they were both very well able to attract and entertain lovers. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour.


Chapter 14

During dinner, Bennet Pater scarcely spoke at all; but when the women had finished clearing up, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Bennet Pater could not have chosen better. Reverend Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of status—such affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturnsday before, to make up her table of mahjong in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew, but he had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his future home. She had even condescended to advise him to find a breeding partner as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself—a humidifying vent in the sitting room.
“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Bennet Mater, “and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that there are not more great ladies like her. Does she live near you, sir?”
“The grounds in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her ladyship’s residence.”
“How is it that a woman is able to be mistress of such an estate?” asked Bennet Mater.
“I am surprised that you not familiar with her history, madam,” replied Squire Collins. “Lady Catherine is, if I may put it delicately, anatomically and legally male. She was formerly known as Sir Lewis de Bourgh but adopted her present style some twenty years ago.”
“I see. Has she any family?”
“She had a breeding contract with a young lass in her youth, but most distressingly proved to be quite sterile. The breeding contract was, of course, dissolved, and she never had children of her own. As it happened, however, a good friend of hers died in childbirth, shortly after her co-parent had met his demise in a mining accident, and the pair left behind two young children. Lady Catherine had the good fortune to adopt them, the boy becoming the heir of Rosings and the girl living under the protection of her brother and her poweful new mother.
“Ah!” said Bennet Mater, shaking her head, “then she is better off than many girls. And what sort of young lass is she? Is she handsome?”
“She is a most charming young lass indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks the young lass of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution and does not exude fertility. In  another lass, this fact might portend difficulty in securing a breeding contract, but with the benefits that would accrue through a family connection with Lady Catherine de Bourgh, some slight imperfections in genetic quality can be easily overlooked by potential breeding partners. The result of genetic reassortment is so difficult to predict at the best of times, after all, and ‘many a stout lad has been bred from a scrawny woman’, as my uncle used to say.”
“Is she on the market? I do not remember her name in the roll of lasses attending the recent Fertility Ball in NeoLondon.”
“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her attending many large events; and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the high society of Titan of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a Martian princess, and that such an elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would have been adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”
“You judge very properly,” said Bennet Pater, “and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?”
“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible.”
Bennet Pater’s expectations were fully answered. The reverend was as absurd as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure.
By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Bennet Pater was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Reverend Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it, he started back, and begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose Fordyce’s Sermons on Eugenics and Good Breeding. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with:
“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips has quite fallen in love with the co-parent of one of the generals. My aunt told me so herself on Saturnsday. I shall walk to Mandalay tomorrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Squire Denny comes back from town.”
Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Reverend Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:
“I have often observed how little young lasses are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction in the art of breeding. But I will no longer importune my young acquaintance.”
Then turning to Bennet Pater, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Bennet Pater accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Bennet Mater and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia’s interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Reverend Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young acquaintance no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with Bennet Pater, and prepared for backgammon.


Chapter 15

Reverend Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society. Although, in order to quality for his profession, he had studied religion, pastoral care and eugenics, he had only learnt sufficient to pass his examinations and had never developed any true understanding. His father had been uneducated and evil-tempered. Collins senior been a tunnel laborer in a copper mine until his early death in a mining accident, succumbing to an all too common fate among the workers of Titan. The early subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but having risen in the world by dint of his own application, that initial humility was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hanoi was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high status, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.
Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he needed to find a lass with whom to breed; and in seeking an acquaintance with the Liqua family he had a breeding partner in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as fecund and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends—of atonement—for being granted their father’s estate upon his death; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s motherly figure confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening she was his settled choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour’s tete-a-tete with Bennet Mater before breakfast, a conversation about his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that he might find a breeding partner at Liqua, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to her younger daughters, she could not take it upon her to say—she could not positively answer—but she did not know of any prepossession; her eldest daughter, she must just mention—she felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon to be offered a contract.”
Reverend Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth—and it was soon done—while Bennet Mater was preparing lunch. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and nubility, succeeded her of course.
Bennet Mater treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters with settled contracts; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in her good graces.
Lydia’s intention of riding to Mandalay was not forgotten, and as the sky was unseasonably clear, it was an attractive plan; every sister except Mary agreed to go with her; and Reverend Collins was to attend them, at the request of Bennet Pater, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his den to himself; for thither Reverend Collins had followed him after breakfast; his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Reverend Collins to join his daughters in their ride; and Reverend Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a rider than a reader, was extremely pleased to go.
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of the Bennet sisters, their time passed till they entered Mandalay. They tied up their llamas, took off their riding robes and strolled down the street in their gay sarongs. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by Reverend Collins. Their eyes were immediately wandering up and down in quest of the astronauts, and nothing less than a beautiful silken sash, or a jewel-encrusted water flask in a shop window, could recall them.
But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another astronaut on the other side of the way. The astronaut was the very Squire Denny concerning whose return from NeoLondon Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger’s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Squire Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to introduce his friend, Squire Wickham, who had returned with him the day before from NeoLondon, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in the Aeronautics Corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only a high ranking position to make him completely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, an aura of prosperity and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation—a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of camels drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Liqua on purpose to inquire after her. Squire Darcy corroborated it with a bow of his head, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Squire Wickham, after a few moments, touched his headdress—a salutation which Squire Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.
In another minute, Squire Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.
Squire Denny and Squire Wickham walked with the young lasses to the door of Phillip Mater’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of Phillips Mater’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation.
Phillips Mater was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, when her civility was claimed towards Reverend Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his acquaintance with the young lasses who introduced him to her notice. Phillips Mater was quite awed by such an excess of good manners; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Squire Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s commission in the Aeronautics Corp. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Squire Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the astronauts, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her co-parent call on Squire Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Liqua would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Phillips Mater protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of monopoly, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Reverend Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.
As they rode home under the bright desert stars, their robes wrapped tight against the stinging chill in the air, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.
Reverend Collins on his return highly gratified Bennet Mater by admiring Phillips Mater’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life.



Chapter 16


As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their aunt, and all Reverend Collins’s scruples of leaving Bennet Pater and Bennet Mater for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the ferflivver conveyed him and the five lasses at a suitable hour to Mandalay; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Squire Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in the house.
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Reverend Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small saddle room at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Phillips Mater understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor—when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found that the air-conditioner alone had cost eight hundred plats, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the robotic repair workshop.
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her estate, with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Phillips Mater a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who had no appetite for the conversation of the reverend, and who had nothing to do but fan themselves and wish that Phillips Mater could afford air-conditioning, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did approach, and when Squire Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The astronauts of the Ngala Corps were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but Squire Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, who followed them into the room.
Squire Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on the likely intensity and duration of the dusty season, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.
With such rivals for the notice of the nubile as Squire Wickham and the astronauts, Reverend Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young lasses he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Phillips Mater, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with cactus tea and cornbread. It is probable that Phillips Mater was unaware that paramours were proscribed for pastors. When the game-tables were placed, he had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to mahjong.
“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to improve myself.” 
“I would be very happy to help you improve yourself whenever you are free,” said Phillips Mater. “I have a lot of leisure time now that my children are mostly grown,” she added. She was pleased with her own ingenuity in informing Reverend Collins in this subtle manner that she was now sufficiently free from child-rearing duties to be able to take a paramour.
Squire Wickham did not play at mahjong, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of Monopoly, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in buying property and building houses to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Squire Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told—the history of his acquaintance with Squire Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Squire Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Mandalay; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Squire Darcy had been staying there.
“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, “He is a man of very large property in New Arabia, I understand.”
“Yes,” replied Squire Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one with mine interests that clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my infancy.”
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Squire Darcy?”
“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth very warmly. “I have spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very disagreeable.”
“I have no right to give my opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for me to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general astonish—and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else as here you are in your own family.”
“Upon my word, I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Mexistan. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”
“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with him I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”
“I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill-tempered man.” 
Wickham only shook his head.
“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is likely to be in this colony much longer.”
“I do not at all know; but I heard nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the Ngala Corps will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”
“Oh! No—it is not for me to be driven away by Squire Darcy. If he wishes to avoid seeing me, he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding him but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Darcy Pater, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Squire Darcy without reflecting with sadness on how unreliable genes are in transmitting character. His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and everything but his disgracing the pedigree of his father.”
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.
Squire Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Mandalay, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very intelligible gallantry.
“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added, “which was my chief inducement to enter the Ngala. I knew it to be a most respectable, agreeable prospecting corps, and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances Mandalay had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude. I must have employment and society. A life of prospecting and excavation is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The church ought to have been my profession—I was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.”
“Indeed!”
“Yes—the late Darcy Pater promised on his deathbed that his family’s influence would secure me a pastorage. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.” 
“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could that be? How could his family disregard his will?”
“There was just such an informality in the terms of the promise as to give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Squire Darcy chose to doubt it—or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence—in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may have spoken my opinion of him, and to him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me.”
“This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.” 
“Some time or other he will be—but it shall not be by me. Till I can forget his father, I can never defy or expose him.” 
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
“But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? What can have induced him to behave so cruelly?”
“A thorough, determined dislike of me—a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Darcy Pater liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood—the sort of preference which was often given me.’
“I had not thought Squire Darcy so bad as this—though I have never liked him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this.”
“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “I can hardly be just to him.” 
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable”—but she contented herself with, “and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!” 
“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house, engaged together in the same activities – in camel racing, lizard hunting, and holodeck adventures, we were alternately rivals and allies. The relationship between my father and Darcy Pater began in a professional capacity, but soon evolved into an intimate and confidential friendship, and finally into a love affair that lasted until my father’s death. My father began life in the profession that your father does such credit to, but he gave up everything to be of use to the late Darcy Pater and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property and to the happiness his paramour. Darcy Pater often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father’s loving care, and when, immediately before my father’s death, Darcy Pater gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to him, as of his affection to myself.” 
“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Squire Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest—for dishonesty I must call it.” 
“It is wonderful,” replied Wickham, “for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride.” 
“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?” 
“Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his employees, and contribute to the development of Titan. Family pride, and filial pride—for he is very proud of what his father was—have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley family, is a powerful motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers.” 
“What sort of lass is Miss Darcy?”
He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother—very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a nubile lass, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death, her home has been NeoLondon, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.”
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying:
“I am astonished at his intimacy with Squire Bingley! How can Squire Bingley, who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Squire Bingley?”
“Not at all.”
“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Squire Darcy is.”
“Probably not; but Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable—allowing something for fortune and figure.”
The mahjong party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table and Reverend Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Phillips Mater. The usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every round; but when Phillips Mater began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged that she would not make herself uneasy.
“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a mahjong-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five silvers any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.”
Squire Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Reverend Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.
“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Reverend Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”
“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were brother and sister; consequently that she is aunt to the present Squire Darcy.”
“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday.”
“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have the protection of a brother of very large fortune, and it is believed that she will breed with her cousin.”
“Breed with her cousin!” Elizabeth could not hide her shock.
“Oh, of course, you don’t know,” explained Wickham quickly. “They are not genetically related. She was adopted as a young girl.”
“Yes, of course,” Elizabeth replied, remembering the story from Reverend Collins. Learning of the understanding between the families made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions and her attempts to flaunt her genetic quality, if he were already destined to father the children of another.
“Reverend Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”
“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked her, even when she was Lewis De Burgh, and that her manners have always been dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derives this reputation partly from the influence of her status and fortune, and partly from the report of her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.”
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to games, and gave the rest of the lasses their share of Squire Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of Phillips Mater’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of Squire Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Reverend Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of the thrill of having owned both Boardwalk and Park Place and the number of hotels she had purchased; and Reverend Collins in describing the remarkable civility of Phillips Mater, her warmth and solicitousness, had more to say than he could well manage before the cart arrived at Liqua House.



Chapter 17

Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Squire Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she knew not how to believe that Squire Darcy could be so unworthy of Squire Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.
“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.”
“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody.”
“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Squire Darcy, to be treating the child of his father’s beloved in such a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.”
“I can much more easily believe Squire Bingley’s being imposed on, than that Squire Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Squire Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”
“It is difficult indeed—it is distressing. One does not know what to think.” 
“I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.” 
But Jane could think with certainty on only one point—that Squire Bingley, if he had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public.
The two young ladies were summoned from the grotto, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Squire Bingley with his sister and aunt came to give their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Zeusday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Bennet Mater as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Bennet Mater’s civilities.
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Bennet Mater chose to consider it as given to provide an opportunity for Squire Bingley to further assess the qualifications of her eldest daughter to be the mother of his children, and was particularly gratified by receiving the invitation from Squire Bingley in person rather than by email. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing with Wickham to impress upon him her fertility and nubility, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Darcy’s look and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Wickham, he was by no means the only intended target of their fertility displays, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it.
“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough—I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I know that I must study the ways of the naturally flirtatious and learn whatever arts I can submit myself to in order to have any chance of securing a breeding contract.”
Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Reverend Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Squire Bingley’s invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he considered it his duty as a man of the cloth to attend such functions.
“I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, is the perfect occasion for me to demonstrate my endorsement of and participation in the mating rituals. It is essential to the future of Titan that even pastors such as myself do their part to endow the next generation with the best possible genes while ensuring genetic diversity, and to that end, I, like all childless men, will take advantage of these occasions designed for assessing the genetic health of young lasses. I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair friends in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a preference which I trust Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being engaged by Squire Wickham for those very dances; and to have Reverend Collins instead! Her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Squire Wickham’s happiness and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Reverend Collins’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could manage. She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first struck her, that she was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mother of the reverend’s offspring. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their forming a parenting contract was extremely agreeable to her. Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Reverend Collins might never make the offer, and till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a incessant sandstorm as prevented their walking to Mandalay once. No aunt, no astronauts, no news could be sought after. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Squire Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Zeusday, could have made such a Fireday, Saturnsday, Sunday, and Moonday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.


Chapter 18

Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Squire Wickham among the cluster of astronauts there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits to accentuate all the signs of her youth, fertility and suitability for motherhood, trusting that she would be able to convince him to share the blessings of parenthood with her. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Squire Darcy’s pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the astronauts; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, “I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”
This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Squire Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.
But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of the reverend, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. Reverend Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, not only fully displayed his unsuitability as a mate (for surely such gracelessness was due to some genetic deficiency or other), but managed to make Elizabeth appear innately deficient as well. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
She danced next with an astronaut, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Squire Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her:
“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.” 
“Heaven forbid! That would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil.” 
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the respect in which she was regarded by her neighbours in being allowed to stand opposite to Squire Darcy.  They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. 
He replied, and was again silent. 
After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:—”It is your turn to say something now, Squire Darcy. I talked about the dance, and you ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the nubility of the local lasses.” 
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
“Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls provide a better forum for fertility displays than public ones. But now we may be silent.”
“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?” 
“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.” 
“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?” 
“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.” 
“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. 
“How near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.” 
“I must not decide on my own performance.” 
He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often ride to Mandalay. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”
The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, “Squire Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his making friends—whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.” 
“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.” 
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Senator Weiming Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Squire Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.
“I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such fine dancing is not often seen. It is evidence of both your superior genetic legacy and your privileged upbringing. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, which is an even greater testament to her genetic fitness, given that she has not had your degree of social training. I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Squire Darcy:—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lass, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”
The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Senator Lucas’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, “Senator Lucas’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.”
“I do not think we were speaking at all. Senator Lucas could not have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”
“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.
“Books—oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.” 
“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.” 
“No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of something else.”
“The present always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said he, with a look of doubt.
“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember having heard, Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its being created.”
“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.
“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?” 
“I hope not.” 
“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.” 
“May I ask to what these questions tend?”
“Merely to the illustration of your character,” said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”
“And what is your success?”
She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”
“I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.” 
“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. 
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which troubled him even more than Elizabeth’s dislike of him disturbed her.
They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:
“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Darcy Pater’s property manager. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Squire Darcy’s using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Squire Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Squire Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the astronauts, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into Mexistan at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”
“His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Darcy Pater’s property manager, and of that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”
“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer. “Excuse my interference—it was kindly meant.”
“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. Having a low social status is no guarantee of inferior genes! I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Squire Darcy.” 
She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness, lifelong security and beautiful babies.
“I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Squire Wickham. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”
“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Squire Bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Squire Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Squire Wickham has deserved much less attention from Squire Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister’s, Squire Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Squire Darcy’s regard.”
“Squire Bingley does not know Squire Wickham himself?” 
“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Mandalay.” 
“This account then is what he has received from Squire Darcy. I am satisfied. But what does he say of the living?” 
“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Squire Darcy more than once, but he believes that the influence was promised to wielded on his behalf only conditionally.” 
“I have not a doubt of Squire Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly; “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Squire Bingley’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before.” 
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Squire Bingley’s assessment of her as a breeding prospect, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Squire Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Reverend Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”
“You are not going to introduce yourself to Squire Darcy!” 
“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well last Sunday.” 
Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Squire Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that Darcy was a heriditary Governor of the Colony and thus above making conversation with common citizens; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Squire Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Reverend Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus: 
“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest social status in the Colony—provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lass like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to attack Squire Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. The reverend prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hanoi,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Squire Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Reverend Collins allowed him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Reverend Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and  Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Reverend Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Squire Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”
As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Squire Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a parenting contract founded on true respect and supported by ample resources could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley’s sister and aunt. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be bred to Squire Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Bennet Mater seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the contract. His being such a charming young man, so superior in genetics and so rich, and living but twenty miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond his sister and aunt were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s having a family with Bingley must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign the burden of securing breeding contracts for her unsettled daughters to the their sister, giving her the freedom at last to devote herself to her paramour, or perhaps seek a new paramour. So many possibilities could now be entertained!  She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Squire Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
“What is Squire Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”
“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Squire Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!”
Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Squire Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
At length, however, Bennet Mater had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold llama meat. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Mary meant her talent to compensate somewhat for her lacklustre appearance, but her performance failed to signal either innate ability or the innate intelligence and determination to learn. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked at his sister and his aunt, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however, imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, “That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young lasses have time to exhibit.”
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
“Musical achievements in young ladies,” said Reverend Collins, “are perhaps overrated as signals of genetic quality and fitness for motherhood. There are certainly other things to be attended to. A mother must be healthy, first and foremost, and intelligent, of course, to produce quality offspring, but she must also be nurturing, patient and kind, and must be knowledgeable of the practical sciences such as nutrition, human biology, medicine, animal husbandry, furniture-making, sewing, etc. We cannot neglect the importance of these duties; nor could I think well of the man who could omit such criteria in his selection of a breeding partner.” And with a bow to Squire Darcy, he concluded his collection of platitudes, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Bennet Pater himself, while his co-parent seriously commended Reverend Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That Squire Darcy, together with his sister and his aunt, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was pestered by Reverend Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lass in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that he had already made a sufficient judgement as to the relative nubility of the various ladies and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Reverend Collins’s conversation to herself.
She was at least free from the offense of Squire Darcy’s further notice; though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Squire Wickham, and rejoiced in it.
The Liqua party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Bennet Mater, had to wait for their ferflivver a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Sondakh Mater and her niece scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Bennet Mater at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of Reverend Collins, who was complimenting Squire Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Bennet Pater, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Squire Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Sondakh Mater or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.
When at length they arose to take leave, Bennet Mater was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Liqua, and addressed herself especially to Squire Bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from NeoLondon, whither he was obliged to go on mine business for a short time.
Bennet Mater was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of genetic counseling, contracts, and prenatal regimens, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter contracted to Reverend Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the contract were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Squire Bingley and Netherfield.


Chapter 19

The next day opened a new scene at Liqua. Reverend Collins made his offer in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturnsday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Bennet Mater, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:
“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?”
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Bennet Mater answered instantly, “Oh dear!—yes—certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy—I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs.” And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:
“Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Reverend Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.”
“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.” And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added: “Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and hearing Reverend Collins.”
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction—and a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Bennet Mater and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Reverend Collins began.
“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other qualifications. You would have been less suitable in my eyes had there not been this little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my assessment has been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the mother of my future children. But before I am run away with by my hopes on this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for breeding—and, moreover, for coming into Mexistan with the design of selecting a co-parent, as I certainly did.”
The idea of Reverend Collins, with all his solemn composure, meticulously weighing the pros and cons of breeding, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further, and he continued:
“My reasons for breeding are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman to set the example of parenthood in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that, when the progeny that will result when my genes are mingled with those of a nubile lass are nurtured within the comfort and culture that my circumstances enable, they will be an asset to this Colony; and thirdly—which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is now a requirement for all clergy that have taken up a parish post to find a partner and begin breeding within a year of becoming settled. Lady Catherine de Bourgh, the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness, has been instrumental in this new regulation. Twice has she condescended to give me a reminder (unasked too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturnsday night before I left Hanoi—between our games of mahjoong, while Jenkinson Mater was mixing a hot cactus toddy for Miss de Bourgh, that she said, ‘Reverend Collins, you must breed. A clergyman like you must breed. Choose a breeding partner properly, choose a gentle lass for my sake; and for your own, let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a lass as soon as you can, bring her to Hanoi, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair Elizabeth, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her status will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention to breed; it remains to be told why my search for a breeding partner has been directed towards Liqua instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many nubile young lasses. But the fact is, that destined, as I am, to be delegated this property after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a co-parent from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place—which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, Elizabeth, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you of my confidence in your qualifications to bear my children. I am aware that you have relatives that are not prime physical specimens and that some may thereby doubt the quality of your genetic heritage. There is also the strange circumstance of your mother having borne only female children. This, too, may fuel speculation as to faulty genetic mechanisms. However, I do not harbour such doubts. It is clear from looking at you, and from your grace and intelligence, that you have had the good fortune to evade any dodgy genes that may have been lurking in your ancestry. And, to be frank, my own genetic and social background is such that I am not in a position to demand perfection. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are raising children together.”
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of your offer, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to decline it.”
“I am not now to learn,” replied Reverend Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, “that it is usual with young lasses to consider an offer for some time before accepting it. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to make you the mother of my children ere long.”
“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of those young lasses (if such lasses there are) who are so daring as to risk their security on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. A co-parenting contract is a recipe for misery without respect on both sides, and I am convinced that we are profoundly unsuited. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill-qualified for the situation.”
“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Reverend Collins very gravely—”but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your nubility, motherliness, economy, and other amiable qualifications.”
“Indeed, Reverend Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you every happiness as a father, and by refusing your contract, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Liqua whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Reverend Collins not thus addressed her:
“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of reckless willfulness at present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to consider such a contract carefully, and when you reflect on your limited prospects and the uncertainty of your future, I am sure you will reconsider.”
“Really, Reverend Collins,” cried Elizabeth with some warmth, “you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have said to you can be interpreted as a request for more time to consider your offer, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one.”
“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear child, that your refusal of my addresses is merely naïve impetuosity. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my offer is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of de Bourgh, and my expectations regarding your father’s estate, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration, that in spite of your evident nubility, it is by no means certain that another offer may ever be made to you. Your family connections are unhappily so dubious, and so riddled with genetic flaws, that they will in all likelihood undo the effects of your outward appearance of fertility. As I must therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to a childish disregard for the likely consequences of your willfulness.”
“I do assure you, sir, that I am not as ignorant or short-sighted as you believe. I know well the risks I am taking and rationally consider them to be preferable to the risk of entering into a co-parenting contract with you. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your offer, but to accept it is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as a willful child, but as a rational creature, facing the abyss with eyes wide open.”
“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my offer will not fail of being acceptable.”
To such perseverance in stubborn self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as ambivalence, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the waywardness of a childish female.


Chapter 20 
Reverend Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his beneficent offer; for Bennet Mater, having dawdled about in the  to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the kitchen, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Reverend Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his Elizabeth had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her youthful naiveté and indecisiveness.
This information, however, startled Bennet Mater; she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter could easily be prevailed upon to change her mind, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so.
“But, depend upon it, Reverend Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will make her know it.”
“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Reverend Collins; “but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable co-parent to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for pliability in a breeding partner. If therefore she actually persists in rejecting my offer, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of temper, she would not be the best mother to my children.”
“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Bennet Mater, alarmed. “Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a lass as ever lived. I will go directly to Bennet Pater, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”
She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her co-parent, called out as she entered his den, “Oh! Bennet Pater, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make Lizzy accept Reverend Collins’s offer, for she vows she will not, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have her.”
Bennet Pater raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication.
“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”
“Of Reverend Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not accept Reverend Collins’s offer of a breeding contract, and Reverend Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy as a breeding partner.”
“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.” 
“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her accepting the contract.” 
“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.” 
Bennet Mater disappeared and reappeared some minutes later with Elizabeth.
“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Reverend Collins has made you an offer of a breeding contract. Is it true?” Elizabeth replied that it was. “Very well—and this offer you have refused?”
“I have, sir.”
“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Bennet Mater?”
“Yes, or I will never see her again.”
“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do not agree to breed with Reverend Collins, and I will never see you again if you do.”
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Bennet Mater, who had persuaded herself that her co-parent regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.
“What do you mean, Bennet Pater, in talking this way? You promised me to insist upon her accepting his offer.”
“My dear,” replied her co-parent, “I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the den to myself as soon as may be.”
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her co-parent, did Bennet Mater give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.
Reverend Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives Elizabeth could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His positive assessment of her as a breeding partner was quite impersonal; and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met at the door by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Reverend Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not accept it.”
Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the kitchen, where Bennet Mater was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her family and secure her own future on Titan. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added in a melancholy tone, “for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.”
Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
“Aye, there she comes,” continued Bennet Mater, “looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for her own future than a pig being led to slaughter. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy—if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer in this way, you will never get a breeding partner at all—and I am sure I do not know what will happen to you when you reach the age of thirty. Your father will not be able to protect you, you know he has no such influence—and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the den, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to foolhardy children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”
Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them, till they were joined by Reverend Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls, “Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Reverend Collins have a little conversation together.”
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Reverend Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Bennet Mater began the projected conversation: “Oh! Reverend Collins!”
“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had Elizabeth honoured me with her services as a breeding partner; for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter’s fertility, without having paid yourself and Bennet Pater the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable and healthy woman to bear my children, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.”

Chapter 21

The discussion of Reverend Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of her mother. As for the gentleman himself, his feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and his assiduous attentions were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and especially to her friend.
The morrow produced no abatement of Bennet Mater’s ill-humour or ill health. Reverend Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturnsday, and to Saturnsday he meant to stay.
After breakfast, the girls rode to Mandalay to inquire if Squire Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunt’s where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been self-imposed.
“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near that I had better not meet Squire Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another astronaut rode back with them to Liqua, and during the ride he particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
Soon after their return, an email was received by Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield. Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and leaving the computer, tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her to the computer in their father’s den. Retrieving the email, Jane said:
“This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town—and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear what she says.”
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to NeoLondon directly, and of their meaning to dine in Pasteur Street, where Sondakh Pater had a house. The next was in these words: “I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Mexistan, except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.” To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Squire Bingley’s being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
“It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the colony. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction when you supply Caroline with a niece or nephew? Squire Bingley will not be detained in NeoLondon by them.”
“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into Mexistan this dusty season. I will read it to you:
‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to NeoLondon might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for the dusty season; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd—but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Bacchanalia in Mexistan may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your friends will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.’”
“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more this season.” 
“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he should.” 
“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own master. But you do not know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from you.” 
“Squire Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth, we are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal in fecundity, manners and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of her being the mother of my nieces and nephews. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother values her qualifications for motherhood greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of securing a contract with any woman he chooses. With all these circumstances to favour an arrangement, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?” 
“What do you think of this sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said Jane as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to breed with Squire Bingley; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?” 
“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?” 
“Most willingly.”
“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is interested in breeding with you, and wants him to breed with Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he is not considering you as a co-parent.”
Jane shook her head.
“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you together can doubt his positive assessment. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much promise for her breeding prospects with Squire Darcy, she would have already ordered baby clothes. But the case is this: We are not rich enough or influential enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been one contract between families, she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley tells you her brother positively appraises Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree less sensible of your merit than when he took leave of you on Zeusday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead of wanting to breed with you, he wants to breed with her friend.”
“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving herself.”
“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”
“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in accepting a contract with a man whose relatives and friends are all opposed to my bearing his children?”
“You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his sister and aunt is more than equivalent to the happiness of bearing his children, I advise you by all means to refuse him.”
“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling. “You must know that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate.”
“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider your situation with much compassion.”
“But if he returns no more in the dusty season, my choice will never be required. A thousand things may arise in five months!”
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’s interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone.
She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane’s temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though diffidence sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield to become the father of her children and her own protector.
They agreed that Bennet Mater should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Squire Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Liqua, and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses.


Chapter 22

The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Reverend Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.” Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her from any return of Reverend Collins’s interest, by engaging it towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost secure of success if he had not been to leave Mexistan so very soon. But here she did injustice to the impetuousness of his character, for it led him to escape out of Liqua House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to speak with her. He was anxious to avoid the notice of the Bennets, from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging, he was afraid that if his second offer of a breeding contract was similarly rejected, he would be a laughing stock. His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had she dared to hope that so much eagerness and eloquence awaited her there.
In as short a time as Reverend Collins’s long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house he earnestly entreated her settle the formalities as quickly as possible to make him the happiest of fathers. The lass felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature was not a sufficient guarantee against another woman angling to land the security his position offered; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, was as eager as he that that establishment be gained promptly.
Senator Weiming and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Reverend Collins’s present circumstances made the position most advantageous for their daughter, whose security was uppermost in their minds. Senator Lucas’s influence was not sufficient to save her from the common fate of the unpartnered, as indeed he had been unable to save her elder sister. Moreover, Reverend Collins’s expectation of being granted the residence of Liqua was a decided attraction. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer Bennet Pater was likely to live. The whole family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of coming on the market a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’s being exiled to Ganymede with their sister and likely never seen again. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Reverend Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his genes undoubtly subpar. But still he would be the father of her children. Without thinking highly of motherhood, it was infinitely preferable to the alternative. However uncertain of giving happiness, it at least secured the right to continue living on the same planet as her family and friends. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been endowed with more than the most feeble signs of fecundity, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Reverend Collins, when he returned to Liqua to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his impending fatherhood.
As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; and Bennet Mater, with great politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Liqua again, whenever his engagements might allow him to visit them.
“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible.”
They were all astonished; and Bennet Pater, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately said:
“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my good sir? You had better neglect your friends than run the risk of offending your patroness.”
“My dear sir,” replied Reverend Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her ladyship’s concurrence.”
“You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that we shall take no offence.”
“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Mexistan. As for your fair daughters, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health, happiness and the best possible fortune in finding breeding partners, not excepting my dear Elizabeth.”
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised that he meditated a quick return. It occurred to Mary that he might be thinking of paying his addresses to one of the younger sisters, and perhaps even to herself. She was sufficiently aware of the precariousness of her own position to be interested in establishing a contract even with a man who was certainly her intellectual inferior. She persuaded herself that Reverend Collins’s dullness was probably not due so much to his genes as to his deprived and abusive childhood. Thus she assured herself that, were she to breed with him, the resulting children would benefit so greatly from her nurturance as to grow into tolerably intelligent and interesting people. But on the following morning, her desperate daydreams were done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.
The possibility of Reverend Collins’s appraising her friend’s qualifications for breeding had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could accept him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could accept him herself, and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out:
“Breed with Reverend Collins! My dear Charlotte—impossible!” The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied: “Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think the offer of a breeding contract with Reverend Collins should be met with as much disdain from a homely 27-year-old as it did from a nubile 22-year-old?” 
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.
“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte. “You must be surprised, very much surprised—so lately as Reverend Collins was wishing to breed with you. You must think he is very indiscriminate in his choice. If that is the case, I must count myself lucky. When you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never was. I ask only for an opportunity to remain on Titan near my family, you and everything I’ve ever known; and considering Reverend Collins’s connections and situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness as the mother of his children is as fair as most people can boast on entering a parenting contract.”
Elizabeth quietly answered “Undoubtedly”; and after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. Charlotte breeding with Reverend Collins was a humiliating picture! Charlotte’s reasoning was cold, but also clear-eyed and impossible to condemn. Her pity for Charlotte was profound. That she should have to share her bed with that dismal man and bear his dullard children just to be able to stay on this barren world was nauseating. Elizabeth hoped that if she herself were ever faced with such a dreadful choice, she would take her chances on Ganymede or Callisto. Her heart quaked at the thought, however, and she wasn’t sure she was brave enough to face an uncertain fate alone on a strange world.  She was grateful that her 30th birthday was still eight years away.

Chapter 23

Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention it, when Senator Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to announce the proposed contract to the family. With joy and relief, he reported the means of his daughter’s deliverance from exile—to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Bennet Mater, with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:
“Good Lord! Senator Lucas, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know that Reverend Collins wants to breed with Lizzy?”
Nothing less than the discipline of diplomat could have borne without anger such treatment; but Senator Lucas’s training carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.
Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters by the earnestness of her congratulations to Senator Lucas, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the high quality of offspring that might be expected from the match, the excellent character of Reverend Collins, and the convenient distance of Hanoi from NeoLondon.
Bennet Mater was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Senator Lucas remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Reverend Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would not be genetically compatible; and fourthly, that the agreement might be annulled after genetic counseling. Two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her resentment. How could Elizabeth be so careless of her own life and future when her mother thought of nothing else! A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Senator and Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter.
Bennet Pater’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it amused him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably brave, would sell herself so cheaply just to secure a living on this godforsaken colony. What a price to pay for such a tawdry prize!
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the proposed contract; but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire that Reverend Collins’s offspring would avoid the worst deficiencies of their sire. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Reverend Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Mandalay.
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to report to Bennet Mater on the comfort of having a daughter well settled; and she called at Liqua rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Bennet Mater’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away.
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth feared that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. She could not blame Charlotte for making such a choice, but whenever she looked at Charlotte, she feared that she was looking into her own future. She told herself, with reluctant immodesty, that she was more nubile and more motherly than Charlotte, and that she was sure to receive a more attractive offer than that of Reverend Collins. This would just begin to console her, when she would reflect that she was already twenty-two and had never received any other offer than that the one that she had just refused. Already perhaps past her best years, she could scarcely be confident of a better opportunity arising. Even Charlotte’s dismal lot might in the end be superior to her own. Her pity for Charlotte made her turn with greater concern to her sister, for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his return.
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her email, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. An email from Reverend Collins arrived on Zeusday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a tenmonth’s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained breeding rights to their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of making birthing plans that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Liqua, whither he hoped to be able to return on Moonday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved of their parenting contract, that she wished it to be concluded as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to make him the happiest of fathers as soon as possible.
Reverend Collins’s return into Mexistan was no longer a matter of pleasure to Bennet Mater. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her co-parent. It was very strange that he should come to Liqua instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and prospective parents were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Bennet Mater, and they gave way only to the greater distress of Squire Bingley’s continued absence.
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in Mandalay of his coming no more to Netherfield the whole dusty season; a report which highly incensed Bennet Mater, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood.
Even Elizabeth began to fear—not that Bingley had changed his opinion—but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane’s happiness, she could not prevent its frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the sterling qualifications of Miss Darcy might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his assessment of Jane.
As for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than Elizabeth’s, but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed all Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.
Reverend Collins returned most punctually on Moonday fortnight, but his reception at Liqua was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and luckily for the others, the business of birth planning relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Liqua only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
Bennet Mater was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the contract threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Reverend Collins, was convinced that they were talking of the Liqua estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Bennet Pater were dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her co-parent.
“Indeed, Bennet Pater,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be resident of this house, that I should be forced to make way for her, and live to see her take her place in it!”
“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor. A pastor, after all, has to visit mines on a regular basis, exposing himself to all manner of carcinogenic particles, respiratory ailments and the possibility of mining accidents. He may not live long enough to take residence of Liqua.”
This was not very consoling to Bennet Mater.
“It doesn’t matter if he outlives you or not. When you are dead, the church will grant the residence to someone and we will left homeless. If only we could have had a son!”
“If only daughters could inherit!” added Bennet Pater.
“How anyone could have the conscience to take away an estate from a man’s co-parent and daughters, I cannot understand; and given to the church! Why should they have it more than anybody else?”
“Because in exchange they ensure our eternal residence in the house of God!” said Bennet Pater, with an irony that was entirely unappreciated by his co-parent.
“Oh, I understand why you don’t care,” said Bennet Mater. “You’ll be dead.”


Chapter 24

Miss Bingley’s email arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in NeoLondon for the dusty season, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Mexistan before he left the colony.
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied the chief of it. Her suberb qualifications for motherhood were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former email. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate of Squire Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures the sophistication of the newest generation of robot staff.
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s assertion of her brother’s being impressed by Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he appraised Jane’s fitness highly, respected her and was moreover fond of her, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to defer his own judgment to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own future, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best, but her sister’s was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley had really come to regard Jane as insufficiently qualified to be the mother of his offspring, or whether he had been prevailed upon by his friends to suppress his own judgement; whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded and her future equally insecure.
A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Bennet Mater’s leaving to visit a paramour, and Jane and Elizabeth being undisturbed for a few days, Jane could not help saying:
“Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.”
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.
“You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not that pain. A little time, therefore—I shall certainly try to get the better.”
With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.”
“My dear Jane!” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.”
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sister’s warm affection.
“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. You wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of life in this backward colony, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the triviality of all human characters, and of the corrosiveness of our obsession with gaining the good opinion of the influential at the cost of terrible injustice. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the other is Charlotte’s breeding contract. It is horrific! In every view it is a tragedy!”
“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Reverend Collins’s respectability, and Charlotte’s prudent character. Remember that she is a plain lass from a family of middling status; and that it is a situation that can provide security, offspring and the opportunity to stay close to her family. To have to breed with Reverend Collins and bear his children may not be such torture for her, and indeed she may feel something like regard for him and gratitude for the contract.”
“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding than I do now. My dear Jane, Reverend Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who raises his children must suffer irritation and humiliation every day, quite apart from having to accept the risk that her children will inherit their father’s contemptible character. You shall not belittle the ignominy of her fate. You shall not, to spare my pity for my friend, pretend that there is any justice or decency in this way of populating a colony.”
“I must think your language too strong in condemning this way of life,” replied Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happily raising a family together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned two instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking that situation is an injustice, and by saying that I am tragically wronged. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves injured. It is not Squire Bingley’s fault if he has awakened feelings in me. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. Decent men never speak of love to young lasses like ourselves and we have no right to complain if we become infatuated with them.”
“But men take pleasure in making us fall for them.” 
“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.” 
“I am far from attributing any part of Squire Bingley’s conduct to design,” said Elizabeth; “but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.” 
“And do you impute it to one of those?”
“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.”
“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?” 
“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”
“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness; and if he judges his happiness to lie in raising children with me, it is nobody’s business to convince him otherwise.”
“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to contract with a lass who has all the importance of influential relatives, powerful connections, and status.”
“Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane; “but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they esteem her better, and they may genuinely think that her genes are of a higher quality than mine. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed him to find in me the best mother of his children, they would not try to dissuade him; if they tried, they could not succeed. By supposing him to have such an assessment of me, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken—or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Squire Bingley’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.
Bennet Mater still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient positive assessment, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Bennet Mater’s best comfort was that Squire Bingley must be down again in the cold season.
Bennet Pater treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he one day, “your sister fancies herself in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to being a mother, a lass likes to be a little in love now and then. It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are astronauts enough in Mandalay to fluster all the young lasses in the colony. Let Wickham be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and, though astronauts are not compelled to settle with breeding partners quite so precipitously as most of us, he is sure to want a family sooner or later.”
“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane’s good fortune.”
“True,” said Bennet Pater, “but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it.”
Squire Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Liqua family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Squire Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to know how much they had always disliked Squire Darcy before they had known anything of the matter.
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society of Mexistan; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes—but by everybody else Squire Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.


Chapter 25

After a week spent in discussing baby names and planning the nursery, Reverend Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturnsday. The only business left was a visit to the genetic counselor to ensure the compatibility of their DNA and the way would be cleared for the reverend to become the happiest of fathers. He took leave of his relations at Liqua with as much solemnity as before; wished the young Bennets good fortune in their pursuit of advantageous contracts, and promised their father another letter of thanks.
On the following Moonday,  Bennet Mater had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his co-parent, who came as usual to spend the Bacchanalia at Liqua. Gardiner Pater  was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, though plagued with asthma, and otherwise greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man cursed with a genetic defect, could nevertheless have been so cultured and agreeable. Gardiner Mater, who was several years younger than Bennet Mater and Phillips Mater, was an amiable, intelligent woman, though flat-chested with pale lips and lacklustre skin. She was a great favourite with all her Liqua nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town.
The first part of Gardiner Mater’s business on her arrival was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Bennet Mater had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had almost been offered breeding contracts, and after all there was nothing in it.
“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have contracted to Squire Bingley if she could have. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think that she might have been Reverend Collins’s breeding partner by this time, had it not been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter settled securely on Titan while I must still fret and worry. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of llama-wool robes lined with silk.”
Gardiner Mater, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made Bennet Mater a slight answer, and, in compassion to her co-parent’s nieces, turned the conversation.
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as you describe Squire Bingley, so easily is convinced of the suitability of a nubile lass for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.”
“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth, “but it will not do for us. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent means to think no more of a lass, who, only a few days prior, had impressed him as the perfect mother of his children.”
“But that expression of ‘the perfect mother’ is so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as often applied to an impression which arise from a half-hour’s acquaintance, as to a real, solid assessment. Pray, how convinced was Squire Bingley of Jane’s ‘perfection’?”
“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other prospects, and wholly engrossed by her displays of fertility. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three lasses, by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be finer indications? Is not general blindness to other candidates the sure sign of a decided mind?”
“Oh, yes!—of that kind of decision which I suppose him to have made. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to you, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service—and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything.”
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister’s ready acquiescence.
“I hope,” added Gardiner Mater, “that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.”
“And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Squire Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of NeoLondon! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Squire Darcy may perhaps have heard of such a place as Lizardneck Lane, but he would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Squire Bingley never stirs without him.”
“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane correspond with his sister? She will not be able to help calling.”
“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”
But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his regard might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s nubility and motherliness.
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she hoped by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him.
The Gardiners stayed a week at Liqua; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and the astronauts, there was not a day without its engagement. Bennet Mater had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and his co-parent, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the astronauts always made part of it—of which astronauts Squire Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions, Gardiner Mater, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing Elizabeth, from what she saw, to be very seriously infatuated with Squire Wickham, his positive assessment of her, and her fondness for him, was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left Mexistan, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.
To Gardiner Mater, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her breeding contract, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of New Arabia to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintances in common; and Wickham was able to fill her in on the sort of gossip that isn’t generally conveyed in emails. She learned that Rubenstein Mater was now violently in love with Wang Pater. After five years together, they still had no interest in any other paramours. Taylor Mater, on the other hand, was merrily hopping from paramour to paramour, leaving a trail of broken hearts behind her. Simpson Mater and Faisel Pater had a ten year history of intermittant romance, interspersed with many outside dalliances, while her old friends Rosselli Mater and McFersun Mater had forgone men altogether and were in love with each other. Wickham also mentioned that a certain Gomez Pater, with whom Gardiner Mater had once been deeply infatuated, was currently unattached. Gardiner Mater listened with rapt attention.
Wickham’s conversation turned to Pemberley. Gardiner Mater had seen Pemberley, and known the late Darcy Pater by character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with Squire Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman’s reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and was confident at last that she recollected having heard Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.


Chapter 26

Gardiner Mater’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:
“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. I have nothing to say against him; he is a most dashing young man with all the outward signs of a superior genetic legacy; and if he had the position he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Entering a co-parenting contract with an astronaut would be a grave mistake.”
“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”
“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.” 
“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I am sure that Squire Wickham has no designs on my womb.”  But Elizabeth’s blush only encouraged Gardiner Mater’s concern.
“This is  a matter of importance, Elizabeth,” she continued. “Astronauts may have good genes, but good genes are not enough to make a  good father.  An astronaut’s job is demanding and dangerous. Even while he lives, he will be frequently away on missions, with hardly any time to attend to his children. And then, as you well know, the death rate of astronauts is alarmingly high. I would hate to see you left with a gaggle of fatherless children...”
“Please do not be concerned. I am not in love with Squire Wickham; no, certainly I am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw – and if he really came to see me as a possible mother to his children, well! I see the imprudence of it, but astronauts do find women to agree to bear their children. How can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted?”
“Your situation is rather worse than that of many of your fellow-creatures, Elizabeth. If your co-parent were to die, you would be in very bad straits. You would still have the right to stay on Titan, of course, but with no brothers and no powerful connections, how could you get by? How could you raise your fatherless brood? It is not a risk you can afford to take.”
Elizabeth was silent. She could see the wisdom of Gardiner Mater’s advice, but she hated to think that love should be so cowardly. Oh! That abominable Squire Darcy! If he had not refused to help Wickham obtain a pastorship, Wickham would now be an enviable catch rather than a hazard to her future.
“Do not let girlish infatuation lead you to neglect common sense. Love is not for lasses. Wait until you are a mature woman and your children no longer need you, and then you may pursue romance. You can even have a love affair with Wickham at that time, if you are both so inclined.”
“I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied.” Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented.
Reverend Collins returned to Mexistan soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Bennet Mater. The resolution of the breeding contract between him and Charlotte was now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “wished they might have healthy children.” They intended to have the lawyers down on Thorsday, and on Watersday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:
“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.” 
“That you certainly shall.” 
“And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?” 
“We shall often meet, I hope, in Mexistan.” 
“I am not likely to leave Darwin for some time. Promise me, therefore, to come to Hanoi.” 
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.
“My father and Maria are coming to me in Tercember,” added Charlotte, “and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome as either of them.”
The contracts were signed and the two of them set off for Darwin the next day. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over. Whereas in the past, they could share their dreams for the future, now Elizabeth could only fervently hope that her own future would be different from that of her friend. Charlotte’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The reverend’s house, his furniture and his herd of llamas were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most friendly and obliging. It was Reverend Collins’s picture of Hanoi and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there to know the rest.
Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in NeoLondon; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.
Her impatience for this second email was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last email to her friend from Liqua had by some accident gone astray.
“My aunt,” she continued, “is going tomorrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Pasteur Street.”
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to Neolondon. I was right, therefore, my last email had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Squire Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Sondakh Mater were going out. I dare say I shall see them soon here.”
Elizabeth shook her head over this email. It convinced her that accident only could discover to Squire Bingley her sister’s being in town.
Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The email which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt.
“My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But, my dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I cannot think why she supposed that I would not be a good mother to her brother’s children, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now, since, if he was really considering me as a breeding partner, we must have met, long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is considering Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say that he deliberately inspired my affections without ever seriously considering me a as breeding partner. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make me happy—your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield again, of his giving up the position, but not with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hanoi. Pray go to see them, with Senator Lucas and Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.—Yours, etc.”
This email gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon form a breeding contract with Squire Darcy’s sister, as by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.
Gardiner Mater about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning Wickham, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. His apparent interest had subsided, he was engaged in assessing her qualifications no longer, he was considering the merits of another. Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. An affectionate and powerful uncle was the most remarkable charm of the young lass to whom he was now turning his attention, in her person she was clumsy, without charm and had rather underdeveloped secondary sexual characteristics, being only fifteen – scarcely old enough to breed; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish for a safer and more prosperous position. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to suppose that it may require him to choose a lass with slightly inferior genes to be the mother of his children, and to make a bid for her womb before others thought to, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both. Why shouldn’t he care as much for giving his children good connections as for giving them good genes?
All this was acknowledged to Gardiner Mater; and after relating the circumstances, she thus went on: “I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much infatuated with him; for had I been, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards him; they are even impartial towards Miss Kwame. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of lass. Moreover, I am sure that no one would detect in my behavior any untoward partiality towards Wickham that could sully my reputation and make other men consider me to be a doubtful proposition. My watchfulness has been effectual. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men may not always remain content to risk their lives as astronauts and may even jump at an opportunity to secure an easier and safer life.


Chapter 27

With no greater events than these in the Liqua family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the rides to Mandalay, sometimes dirty and sometimes hot, did Primember and Sectober pass away. Tercember was to take Elizabeth to Hanoi. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Reverend Collins. There was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was to accompany Sir Weiming and his third daughter. The improvement of spending a night in NeoLondon was added in time, and the plan became perfect as a plan could be.
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her.
The farewell between herself and Squire Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his appraisal, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be considered as possibly worthy to be the mother of his children; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, there was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that they would be lovers someday when her child-rearing years had passed.
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Senator Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the closh-closh of the camels’ hooves on the rasping sand. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known the Senator’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of his loyal but thoughtless support of government policies; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.
It was a journey of only fifty miles, and they began it so early as to be in Lizardneck Lane by noon. As they drove to Gardiner Pater’s door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to wait in the family room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a tenmonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the afternoon at a camel rodeo.
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Gardiner Mater gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Lizardneck Lane, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the hope of breeding with him.
Gardiner Mater then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so well.
“But my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of lass is Miss Kwame? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”
“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in breeding considerations, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Bacchanalia you were afraid of his contracting with me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a lass with an influential uncle, you want to find out that he is mercenary.”
“If you will only tell me what sort of lass Miss Kwame is, I shall know what to think.” 
“She is a very good kind of lass, I believe. I know no harm of her, though it is said she has little aptitude for domestic accomplishments and is rather childish.” 
“An innate deficiency of mental faculties, no doubt. And he paid her not the smallest attention till her cousin’s death made her object of her uncle’s generous solicitude.” 
“No—why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain my affections because I had no family connections, what occasion could there be for considering a lass whom he did not care about, and who was equally lacking in influence?” 
“It seems cowardly for him to choose to breed with a lass who is unlikely to pass on genes for high intelligence to his children.” 
“A man in distressed circumstances has not leisure to demand all the perfections which other people may require. If he does not object to her qualifications, why should we?” 
“His not objecting does not justify him. It only shows that he lacks confidence in his ability to survive the hazards of an astronaut’s life and to eventually merit a promotion to a safer position.”
“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. He shall be mercenary and a coward.” 
“No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in New Arabia.” 
“Oh! If that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in New Arabia; and their intimate friends who live in Mexistan are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going tomorrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.” 
“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.” 
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the rodeo, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the clear season.
“We have not determined how far it shall carry us,” said Gardiner , “but, perhaps, to the Lakes.”
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “Oh, my dear, dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! What felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are young men to lakes of methane and unexplored caverns that may harbor treasure? Oh! What hours of transport we shall spend! Perhaps we will discover a ruby the size of a saddle horn or a fistful of diamonds! What joy! We could abandon forever the men of Titan and the dreary necessity to breed, purchase a ticket to Earth and discover what freedom is like! And if we are not so lucky as that, at least we will have a couple of weeks together to indulge in pretty fantasies!”

Chapter 28

Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her eastern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the turning to Hanoi, every eye was in search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The endless black sands at last yielding to a golden sandscape artificially colored to resemble an earthan desert. Reverend Collins’ small herd of black and white llamas came first into view, followed by his modest concrete dwelling painted with flowers. Reverend Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the carriage, rejoicing at the sight of each other. Collins Mater welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that the reverend’s manners were not altered by his new breeding arrangement; his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his breeding partner’s offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Reverend Collins said anything of which his breeding partner might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the stove, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened in NeoLondon, Reverend Collins invited them to take a stroll in the grounds, which were large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. Looking after llamas was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the importance of tending to the health and comfort of the llamas, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way past every prickly pear, every yucca, and every clump of manna, scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, he discoursed on the disposition, health and milk production capacity of each of his llamas. But of all the delights which his garden, or which the colony or planet could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded in the distance from a small rise in the front of his house. It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

After returning to the house and dusting the novel yellow sand off of their clothes, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her breeding partner’s help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When the reverend could be forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten. She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in Darwin. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Reverend Collins joining in, observed:

“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you and Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her ladyship’s gyrocopter is regularly ordered for us. I should say, one of her ladyship’s gyrocopters, for she has several.”

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,” added Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Mexistan news, and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her composure in bearing with her duty to breed with Reverend Collins, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Reverend Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out—

“Oh, my dear Eliza! Pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment.”

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more, and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a sporty yellow gyrocopter at the garden gate.

“And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that one of the llamas was in labour, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter.”

“La! My dear”, said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Jenkinson Mater, who lives with them; the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small?”

“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in?”

“Oh! Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in.”

“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She looks sickly and frail. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will bear him suitably feeble children.”

Reverend Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir Weiming, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way.
 
At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house. As they disappeared Reverend Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.



Chapter 29

Reverend Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his breeding partner, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady Catherine’s condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.
“I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by her ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!”
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. The reverend was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, so that the sight of rooms fitted with such sophisticated electronics, so many robot servants and such exotic dishes, might not wholly overpower them.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth— “Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear lass, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever sari is superior to the rest—there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of status preserved.” 
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas, though her curiousity was also piqued as she was eager to see how elegant a lady the former lord had become.
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about two miles across the desert. Unlike the endless expanse of untended desert they had crossed to arrive at Hanoi, this stretch was beautified with pink wildflowers among the cactuses and the occasional stately palm tree. At the approach of Rosings, moreover, there was a fanciful stone garden with grey grottos, rock statues and a lilypond, floating like an enchanted island on a black ocean of sand. Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Reverend Collins expected the scene to inspire.
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment increasing, and even Senator Lucas did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard no rumours of Lady Catherine that spoke of either extraordinary talents or disconcerting perversity, and the mere stateliness of money or power she thought she could witness without trepidation.
In the entrance-hall, Reverend Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportions and the large picture windows, each portraying, with electronic wizardry, a different scene; one appearing to overlook a patch of Kenyan savana, another a village in Yorkshire and yet another a mountain temple in Hunan. From there, they followed the welcoming robots through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Jenkinson Mater were sitting. Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them and the proper introductions were made.
In spite of having been at the council, Senator Lucas was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features that hinted at the handsome man she had once been. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. Lady Catherine was an unusual combination: a man by birth and biology, a woman by choice, dress and air; and although she exuded an elegant femininity, there was one characteristic that she retained from her birth sex, and that was her confidence. No other woman on Titan could have been as regal and commanding as one who was born with, and retained, all the rights of a man.
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance to Squire Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies, and that she had a very different genetic legacy was easily apparent. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not positively defective, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Jenkinson Mater, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said.
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to the Yorkshire window to admire the view, Reverend Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was more worth looking at in the summer, for each picture window changed in real time and followed Earthan seasons as faithfully as their subjects had when they were recorded.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the robotic servants and all the articles of plate which Reverend Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Senator Lucas, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his daughter’s breeding partner said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them, as many did, such as the roast beef obtained from the only cattle herd on Titan, and the shrimp raised in the pond in the garden. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh—the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, while the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time. Jenkinson Mater was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her llamas and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady’s attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Charlotte, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who she observed to Charlotte was a very nubile lass whose intelligent air suggested the probability of a good genetic foundation. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them had promising prospects of breeding, whether they were shapely, what skills they had developed, what sort of ferflivver her father kept, and what had been her mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then observed,
“Your father’s estate is promised to the church, I think. For your sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for denying females the right to inheritance. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?”
“A little.”
“Oh! Then—some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. We have a capital positronic organ, probably superior to anything you have encountered before. But perhaps you are more comfortable on the lute or the violin? You shall display for us some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”
“One of them does.”
“Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss Watanamis all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do you draw?”
“No, not at all.”
“What, none of you?”
“Not one.”
“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. You have at least the practical skills of furniture-making, sewing, family nutrition, etc., I hope.”
“Yes.”
“Ah well, those skills are hardly sufficient to signal genetic superiority, but at least they can reassure a man of your capacity to raise children. Are any of your sisters on the market?”
“Yes, ma’am, all.”
“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The younger ones out before the elder ones have bred! Your younger sisters must be very young?”
“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps she is full young to be much on display. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to breed early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”
“Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”
“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
“You cannot be more than twenty-five, I am sure, therefore you need not conceal your age.”
“I am not three-and-twenty.”
“Well, there’s time enough then, but I hope you attract an offer soon. The scent of desperation can so quickly taint the natural motherly aura of a young lass.”
When the gentlemen had joined them, and coffee was over, the party repaired to the holodeck, which was a new and thrilling experience for most of the party. At the touch of a few icons on a monitor, the basement of Rosings was transformed into a rolling English countryside on a summer’s day. Each guest was introduced to a virtual horse and they were invited to pursue a virtual fox. Lady Catherine was, of course, the master of the hunt, and the women, thankfully, were allowed to ride astride their mounts rather than sidesaddle. In spite of this concession, it was a difficult task, as none of them had ridden anything but llamas and camels before. But though the ride was unsteady and hedges were jumped with great trepidation, the experience was magical. Elizabeth had seen videos of the earth  and had always been fascinated by England, the home of her ancestors, but she had never before felt surrounded by an English summer’s day, the mild sun and the dampness of the air feeling both alien and strangely familiar. The pursuit of the fox was the farthest thing from her thoughts, as she was enchanted by the trees, the flowers, the clouds, the woodlands, the fields and the stream. When Lady Catherine declared the fox dead and the game over, Elizabeth reluctantly followed the others out of the basement and thought, for the first time, that to be rich would really be a very fine thing.
After a sherry and a biscuit to console them on their return to reality, a gyrocopter was offered to Reverend Collins and, upon its gratefully acceptance, a robot servant was immediately dispatched to prepare it. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the gyrocopter; and with many speeches of thankfulness on the reverend’s side, and as many bows on the senator’s, they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by the reverend to give her opinion on the mistress of Rosings, which, for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was, for apart from her possession of a holodeck, Elizabeth found little to admire in Lady Catherine. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Reverend Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship’s praise into his own hands.


Chapter 30

Senator Lucas stayed only a week at Hanoi, but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a breeding partner and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Senator Lucas was with them, Reverend Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in his llama cart, and introducing him to the surrounding parishioners; but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of the reverend by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at tending the llamas or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own den, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the family room for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Reverend Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own den, had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement which allowed them the opportunity to talk privately.
“How is your journey to maternity progressing?” Elizabeth asked Charlotte one morning.
“Oh, it has been a trial!” said Charlotte with a sigh. “But I may have some good news.”
 “Have you conceived?”
“Yes, I have, tentatively, at least.”
“Tentatively?”
“Well it’s only a month in, and the first few months are hazardous. Many embryos don’t make it. And then, of course, at three months we must do a genetic analysis and make sure that there are no defects.”
“Yes, I see. Then I tentatively congratulate you.”
“Thank you. At least I am relieved for now of the duty of trying to conceive.” 
“Has it been very hard?” Elizabeth questioned gently, trying not to picture the relevant activities.
“It has been hard,” Charlotte blushed slightly. “I know young lasses like us are not supposed to enjoy the procedure, but I have heard that some breeding partners make it quite tolerable and even quite exciting.”
“The reverend is perhaps not so experienced,” Elizabeth ventured.
“No, I believe he is not experienced at all,” Charlotte responded. “Pastors are not supposed to have paramours, you know.”
“Yes, of course. That would make it doubly difficult for you. But he clearly can perform, since you have conceived.”
“Oh yes, he can do it,” Charlotte answered. “He may not be skillful, but he is enthusiastic – a little overly enthusiastic, perhaps.”
Elizabeth regarded her friend with pity.
“Older women say that paramour love-making is heavenly,” Elizabeth remarked. “You will have your reward in time, I suppose. But hold on – are pastors’ co-parents allowed to have paramours?”
“Yes, of course, you silly goose. I may be contracted to the reverend, but he doesn’t own me.”
“He just has a claim on a couple decades of your life!” responded Elizabeth with some heat, thinking once again of the injustice of the current society.
“True, but think,” said Charlotte in a conspiratoral voice, “in twenty years, Reverend Collins will be celibate again and I will be free to taste all the pleasures of romance.”
Two decades seemed to Elizabeth a very long time to be sacrificed to the service of the reverend and his progeny, but she was gratified that Charlotte could console herself with these pretty thoughts, and for the sake of Charlotte’s dignity and her own composure, she turned the conversation to less distressing topics.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. The Festival of Fertility was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Squire Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Reverend Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hanoi Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and upon seeing his ferflivver descending into the Park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Squire Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle Lord Fitzwilliam, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Reverend Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her room, crossing the road, and immediately told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:
“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Squire Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me.”
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Squire Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in Mexistan, paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Collins Mater, and whatever might be his feelings toward her friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him without saying a word.
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and grounds to Collins Mater, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the well-being of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment’s pause, added:
“My eldest sister has been in NeoLondon these three months. Have you never happened to see her there?”
She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.


Chapter 31

Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that they reflected well on both his genetic and his social legacy. It was some days, however, before they received any invitation to Rosings—for while there were visitors in the house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till the Festival of Fertility, almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Squire Darcy they had seen only at church.
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room.
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Collins Mater’s pretty friend had moreover captured his interest. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Darwin and Mexistan, of travelling and staying at home, and of new books and music from Earth, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Squire Darcy. His eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out:
“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”
“We are speaking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply.
“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music. There are few people in Titan, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had born a lady, I should have been encouraged to nurture my natural talent to a more impressive degree. Anne, too, would have made a fine musician if I had begun my lessons with her at an earlier age. I was a neglectful mother in some respects, I’m afraid, not having been born to the role. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”
Squire Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency.
“I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel if she does not practice a good deal. Practise allows one to display fully the talent that lies dormant in one’s genes.”
“I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such advice. She practises very constantly.”
“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Collins Mater has no positronic organ, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the instrument in Jenkinson’s room. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part of the house.”
Squire Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and made no answer.
When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the lute. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the lute stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’s countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:
“You mean to frighten me, Squire Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me? I will not be alarmed though your sister does play so well. I cannot hope to live up to your assessment, but then I have no desire to be found a worthy vessel for the propagation of your germline. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate me.”
“I shall not say you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you nor any design on breeding with you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not your own.”
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Squire Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Mexistan—and, give me leave to say, very unchivalrous to point out the incongruity of displaying my fertility to you—for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”
“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.
“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”
“You shall hear then—but prepare yourself for something very dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing him in Mexistan, you must know, was at a ball—and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lass was sitting down in want of a partner. Squire Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.”
“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lass in the assembly beyond my own party.”
“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”
“Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better, had I sought an introduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.”
“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend himself to strangers?”
“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”
“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy, “of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as I often see done.”
“Do you claim a genetic deficiency? That will not do. My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many lasses’ do. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault—because I will not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I believe my genes for musical talent to be inferior to that of any other lass.”
Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us excel at displaying our innate capacities to strangers.”
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy:
“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a NeoLondon master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had circumstances allowed her to learn.”
Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his cousin’s praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of a positive assessment; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have been just as likely to breed with her, had she been his equal in status.
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship’s gyrocopter was ready to take them all home.


Chapter 32

Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane while Charlotte and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door. She thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, but when she closed up the computer, and opened the door, to her very great surprise, Squire Darcy, and Squire Darcy only, entered the room.
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were to be within.
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollecting when she had seen him last in Mexistan, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed:
“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Squire Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Squire Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left NeoLondon?”
“Perfectly so, I thank you.”
She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause added: “Squire Bingley does not spend much time in Netherfield.” 
“It is true that he does not need to stay at Netherfield very often. He has capable supervisors to keep him abreast of the workings of the mine, and he is understandably much engaged in his pursuit of a breeding partner, given the requirements of the law.” 
Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.
He took the hint, and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Reverend Collins first came to Hanoi.”
“I believe she did—and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object.”
“Reverend Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a co-parent.” 
“Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few well-bred women who would have accepted him. My friend has an excellent understanding—though I am not certain that I consider her contracting to Reverend Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems content, however, and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.” 
“It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own family and friends.” 
“An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly three hundred miles.?” 
“And what is three hundred miles in good weather? A few hours by ferflivver. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.” 
“The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case here. Reverend Collins has a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys—and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her family under less than half the present distance.” 
“At least she has secured her right to stay on the same planet as her family,” responded Squire Darcy.
Elizabeth looked surprised. It was not politic of Squire Darcy to allude to the desperation of circumstances that had led Charlotte to accept Reverend Collins.
The gentleman experienced some discomfort; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:
“Are you pleased with Darwin?”
A short dialogue on the subject of the central colony ensued, on either side calm and concise—and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from their ride. The tete-a-tete surprised them. Squire Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away.
“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone. “My dear, Eliza, he must be assessing you, or he would never have called us in this familiar way.”
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. Camel racing season was over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and, of course, the holodeck, but even a holodeck, they ventured doubtfully, may become dull over time; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the ride to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of riding thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society and an evident admiration of Elizabeth. As Colonel Fitzwilliam was a mature man and a father, Elizabeth was flattered by this admiration. Since he clearly could not be considering her as a breeding partner, and she was far too young to excite his interest as a paramour, she deduced that he simply enjoyed her conversation.
But why Squire Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice—a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Charlotte knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and she would liked to have believed this change the effect of his attention being focused on the assessment of Elizabeth as a breeding partner. She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hanoi; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his considering her qualifications, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Catherine did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment. For she was certain that even Elizabeth could overlook her dislike of Darcy if she were offered the opportunity to give birth to the future heir of Rosings.
Colonel Fitzwilliam’s attentions to Elizabeth worried Charlotte more, however. It was not natural that a mature man with a breeding partner should look so fondly upon a young lass. She was reluctant, however, to instill suspicion into Elizabeth’s heart or to risk slandering a respectable man and relative of Lady Catherine, so she said nothing.


Chapter 33

More than once did Elizabeth unexpectedly meet Squire Darcy in her evening ride to the western hill near Rosings, where the sunset was particularly splendid. She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that it was a favourite excursion of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and ride with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions—about her pleasure in being at Hanoi, her love of solitary rides, and her opinion of Collins Mater’s happiness; and then more than once he pointedly made reference to Colonel Fitzwilliam’s children. It distressed her a little, as she sensed that Squire Darcy was trying to remind her that Colonel Fitzwilliam was not an eligible breeding prospect. She was embarrassed that Squire Darcy could mistake her enjoyment of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s company for an attempt to display her suitability as a co-parent, and she was quite glad to find herself at the stables of the Parsonage.
She was engaged one day as she rode in reflecting on Jane’s last email, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Squire Darcy, she saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Forcing a smile, she said:
“I did not know before that you ever rode this way.” 
“I have been making the tour of the parish,” he replied, “as I generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?” 
“No, I should have turned in a moment.”
And accordingly she did turn, and they rode towards the Parsonage together.
“Do you certainly leave Darwin on Saturnsday?” said she.
“Yes—if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he pleases.”
“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Squire Darcy.”
“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. “And he is inclined to believe that he has the right and the responsibility to supervise other people’s lives.”
“You have had a disagreement?” Elizabeth ventured.
“Of a sort, but it is really just a misunderstanding. Darcy has warned me off you.”
 “Warned you off me? What can that mean?”
“Simply that Darcy imagines that I have developed a romantic interest in you.” 
“A romantic interest! But that is absurd! I am just a lass and it will be decades before I am of an age for paramours.” 
“Quite so, although it is not, indeed, impossible for a man to be attracted to a lass. Darcy is not wrong  in supposing that you could be in danger in the company of certain men.” 
“Impossible! That would be perverse.”
“And yet it is not uncommon,” continued Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Fortunately, however, that is not my afflication. You may rest easy, I have no romantic designs on you.”
“I never thought you had!” said Elizabeth hotly.
“But there is a reason that I have enjoyed watching you. Please don’t be alarmed. The fact is that you remind me of your mother.”
“My mother! I am nothing like my mother!” Elizabeth was at once distressed at the comparison and confused as to why such a resemblance, if it existed, should be of any interest to the Colonel.
“You are, actually, in some ways,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam. “You have her sparkling green eyes and mahogany hair. You even have much of her spirited disposition.”
“Indeed! You surprise me,” Elizabeth replied. “I did not know that you were even acquainted with my mother.”
“I am. In fact, I am in love with her,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.
“Well!” Elizabeth responded, quite nonplussed. “That is certainly interesting, but it has nothing to do with me.” Elizabeth had never liked to hear of her mother’s paramours, although she was certainly happy that she had some.
“Of course,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam. “I just wanted to explain my perhaps excessive attentiveness of late, and to assure you that I am not a danger to you or to any lass.”
“Again, Colonel Fitzwilliam, I never thought you were!” said Elizabeth. “But this outlandish idea, you think, has formed itself in Darcy’s mind?” She paused to consider. “I understand now what you mean about Squire Darcy. He deludes himself into thinking that he can understand the hearts of others.”
The conversation waned. To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said:
“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not have a paramour, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”
“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he must divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”
“Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.”
“Indeed,” he replied, “She needs looking after. As I observed before, Darcy is not wrong to suppose that some men are attracted to lasses, and she is a charming girl, though only sixteen.”
This was a strange comment and she wondered if there had been some trouble in the past with Miss Darcy. She observed Colonel Fitzwilliam’s earnest expression and directly replied:
“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”
“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man—he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”
“Oh! Yes,” said Elizabeth drily; “Squire Darcy is uncommonly kind to Squire Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”
“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”
“What is it you mean?”
“It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the lass’s family, it would be an unpleasant thing.”
“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.” 
“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent breeding contract, but without mentioning names or any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into a situation of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last cold season.” 
“Did Squire Darcy give you reasons for this interference?” 
“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lass’s suitability for breeding.” 
“And what arts did he use to dissuade Bingley from trusting his own judgment?” 
“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “He only told me what I have now told you.” 
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”
“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?” 
“I do not see what right Squire Darcy had to decide on the trustworthiness of his friend’s assessment, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend was to breed. But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is possible that the lass was quite evidently of inferior stock.” 
“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam, “but it is a lessening of the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.” 
This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture of Squire Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world two men over whom Squire Darcy could have such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to set Bingley against Jane she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, he was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.
“There were some very strong objections against the lass’s suitability for breeding,” were Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and those strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who had asthma, and another who had gout, thought Elizabeth.
“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!—her understanding excellent, her training equally thorough in the practical arts and the theoretical sciences, and her fertility abundantly displayed. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has robust good health and abilities that Squire Darcy himself need not disdain.” When she thought of her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that her mother had any deficiency in her genes. A lack of education could explain her silliness, and her disposition was at least, as Colonel Fitzwilliam had noted, lively. There was really no possible reason to think that Jane could not produce the most intelligent, healthy and good-hearted of offspring, and she was quite decided, at last, that Darcy had been partly governed by the worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Squire Bingley for his sister.
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to see Squire Darcy, it determined her not to attend her friends to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink cocktails. Collins Mater, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much as possible, prevented her breeding partner from pressing her; but Reverend Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather displeased by her staying at home.


Chapter 34

When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Squire Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the emails which Jane had written to her since her being in Darwin. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Squire Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next—and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell, and when she opened the door, she saw, to her utter amazement, Squire Darcy. He walked into the room and in an hurried manner immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began:
“In vain I have struggled. It will not do. I have made a decision. I want you to be my breeding partner.”
Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement.
“I do not believe you to be the wisest choice,” he continued. “In fact, it is most imprudent of me to consider mixing your family’s genes in with my own. Lady Catherine will be furious, my relations will be scandalized, and if I cannot have a son, my inheritance will be lost to my descendants...”
Elizabeth stared and, with the detachment born of shock, she honed in on a single solid idea within a cloud of confusion, “And, why, pray, would you not be able to have a son?”
Darcy looked at her in some surprise. “You parents have only daughters. There must be a reason.”
“A reason?” Elizabeth echoed. “What need is there of a reason?” She looked at him in bewilderment “It is a matter of chance! A quirk of nature! The luck of the draw!” Elizabeth now felt her resources muster to face this strange accusation, while the even stranger thought of Darcy wishing to breed with her was still too difficult to take in.
Darcy looked at her doubtfully. “Surely you can’t believe that,” he said. “Not on Titan. After the first daughter, any other couple would have taken to IVF to ensure a son.”
Elizabeth was stunned. She had never before thought it at all odd that her parents had had only daughters.
“Perhaps they wanted to let nature take it’s course,” she said uncertainly.
“Do your parents seem to you like the kind of fanatics that would bring disaster upon themselves and their family for the sake of forgoing medical intervention?” Darcy countered.
He saw her confusion and tried to resume his suit. “But that doesn’t matter,” he said. “I’m willing to take the chance because I have decided that you are the only lass who is suitable to bear my children.”
Elizabeth was shaken out of her confusion by this resumption of the topic of breeding. “But why?” she said. “It makes no sense. You cast peculiar aspersions on my family and are suspicious of the soundness of my genes, your family would disapprove, and you don’t even like me.”
“That is your mistake,” said Darcy. “I do not dislike you.” He paused, drew a breath and continued. “I do in fact most ardently admire and love you.”
Elizabeth was stunned to silence. Love, she thought blankly. It cannot be. Lasses sometimes fancy themselves in love with a man, but a man -- a mature, respectable man -- does not love lasses. Her own personal dislike of Darcy was overshadowed by the shock of hearing this confession of unnatural desire.
“This cannot be,” she said. “You are confused. You are mixing up breeding arrangements and romantic feelings. Even if I could like you, which I could not, I would never consider breeding with a man who was in love with me.”
Darcy looked down and then walked to the window and gazed out of it. After a minute, he returned to Elizabeth.
“You lasses,” he said slowly, “have been led to believe that men are only attracted to older women. That is not true. You don’t have to be a deviant to be attracted to a sexually mature lass. I have tried to control my feelings, in deference to the peculiar mores of this society, but they are not shameful.” Darcy paused for a moment and continued.  “I want you to know the truth – that I love you as I have never loved another.”
Elizabeth struggled to remain cool and rational. These were unfamiliar waters and her vanity was stirred in spite of herself, but she would not reveal these girlish perplexities. “Attraction,” she paused for consideration. “Attraction between a man and a lass may not be unnatural,” she said judiciously. “But it is certainly dishonourable and ought to be suppressed.”
Darcy looked at her as though trying to reach across a chasm. He never doubted that girls saw the world differently than men did, but he was unprepared for the thoroughness with which lasses had been indoctrinated into thinking that they were not desirable to men. “Do you really think that a man would take a breeding partner that he was not attracted to?”
“Attraction is irrelevant,” Elizabeth stated. “They have only to consider the suitability of a lass to bear and raise their children.”
“But men are not machines,” said Darcy. “That they must take into account a lass’s qualifications is, of course, a certainty, but in the end they will choose a lass that they will enjoy breeding with. No man can deny that fact.”
Elizabeth considered. Could it be that Squire Darcy was just trying to justify his own perversion by projecting his desires onto the entire male gender? Or could there be something to what he said? Would it be so strange for men to lust for lasses?
“Perhaps what you say is true,” said Elizabeth. “That does not justify you’re making love to me in this manner. You may be attracted to me but you spoke not just of attraction but of love. Love, at least, has no part in a breeding contract,” she said decidedly.
“Love has been part of breeding arrangements for centuries,” Darcy countered. “It is only the bizarre nature of Titanian social arrangements that tries to separate them.”
“Love is dangerous,” said Elizabeth. “It undermines the stability of the parenting arrangement. Children should not be brought into a relationship that depends on such a violent and fickle emotion. I could never breed with a man who claims to be in love with me.”
Squire Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise.
“Is that your response then to my offer? Are you refusing to consider breeding with me?” 
“Indeed I am,” replied Elizabeth.
His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:
“Had I come to you with hypocritical rationality and told you that I had decided that you were the best candidate that I had come across, that you had the best genes and the most desirable family connections and that I had therefore concluded that I should like to enter a breeding contract with you, would you have consented to have children with me?”
“You are mistaken, Squire Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued: “You could not have made the offer of your contract in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.” Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on: “Do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?” 
As she pronounced these words, Squire Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued: “I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there. You dare not, you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means of turning Bingley against Jane—of exposing her to the derision of the world for disappointed hopes and misery of the acutest kind.” She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
“Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.
With assumed tranquillity he then replied: “I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards him I have been kinder than towards myself.”
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.
“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Squire Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? Or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”
“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an interest in him?” 
“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy contemptuously; “yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.” 
“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth with energy. “You have reduced him to his present state of poverty—comparative poverty. You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! And yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule.” 
“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, “is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, “these offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my concerns about your family’s breeding capacities and disguised my own ardent inclination. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. My only fault is to be more honest than most men.” 
“It makes no difference,” she said. “I would never consent to breed with a man I did not respect, and I have never met a man I have been less inclined to respect.” 
She went on, “From the very beginning—from the first moment, I may almost say—of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world with whom I could ever be prevailed upon to breed.”
“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.”
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of a breeding contract from Squire Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for so many months! In love with a lass! So much in love as to wish to breed with her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend’s breeding with her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case—was almost incredible! And the strange character of those objections, his inexplicable belief that if he were to breed with her he would have to reconcile himself to never having a son! And to say that love compelled him to accept such a possibility! It was frightening to have unconsciously inspired so strong a passion. And his pride, his abominable pride—his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane—his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging it, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Squire Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his involuntary and wholly inappropriate passion had for a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the whirr of Lady Catherine’s gyrocopter made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room.


Chapter 35

Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to stables to saddle up her chosen mount, a small white llama with a gentle disposition and fur like velvet, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman on a large black camel heading towards the stable from the west. Fearful of its being Squire Darcy, she was directly retreating, with the thought of walking to the nearby saguaro grove in lieu of a ride. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and urging the camel to a gallup, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Squire Darcy, she moved again towards the stable. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been riding in the area some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with a slight nod, turned again into the desert, and was soon out of sight.
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way towards the saguaro grove, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:—
“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.
“Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the interests of either, I had detached Squire Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Squire Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the son of my father’s most well-beloved paramour, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the prevention of a breeding contract between two young persons, both of whom are undoubtedly capable of finding other suitable partners, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.
“I had not been long in Mexistan, before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the colony as a potential breeding partner. But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I became convinced that he was serious about offering her a contract. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Senator Lucas’s accidental information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their coming to an agreement. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was so marked as to interfere with a cool assessment of her qualifications. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening’s scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If you have not been mistaken here, I must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain—but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My fundamental objections to the breeding arrangement were essentially those which I last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside in my own case, but with the understanding that these objections would be even a greater impediment to Bingley’s happiness than to my own. Squire Bingley is without question fond of your sister. I hope you will not judge him too harshly if I say that his belief in her unique desirability to be his breeding partner stems not only from a rational assessment of her fertility, education and motherly disposition, but from his attraction to her and affection for her. With these heightened emotions operating on Bingley’s simple heart, I feared that even were he to learn of a serious deficiency in your sister’s genes, he might be tempted to overlook it, despite the fact that such a flaw would profoundly undermine his future happiness. Looking at your various relatives, it appears that there are numerous genetic flaws that your sister could have inherited, but the deficiency that would be most grevious would be an inability to bear a son. Any man would be devastated by being deprived of a son and heir, and Bingley, far from being an exception, would suffer more than most. Although I had convinced myself that I would rather have you than have a son, I cannot believe that a similar decision by Bingely, to accept Jane in spite of her genetic flaws, would promote his long-term happiness.  There is nothing in the world Bingley wants more than to have a son. Once he realized the sacrifice that he had made, the resentment that would grow between your sister and Bingley could only embitter their lives.
“There were also other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than it is honourable to both the sense and genetic quality of both. I will only say farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.
“The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in NeoLondon. We accordingly went—and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented him from offering her a contract, had it not been seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. He had before believed her to return his affection with sincere regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into Mexistan, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, there is not another soul on Titan who would condemn them.
“With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured Squire Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
“Squire Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who was originally my father’s property manager and latterly his lover; and on George Wickham, who became his godson, my father’s kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at the Colonial University of Titan—most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from his own lack of economy, would have been unable to give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging; he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The vicious propensities—the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his godfather, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Darcy Pater could not have. Here again I shall give you pain—to what degree you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Squire Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character—it adds even another motive.
“My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to Squire Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow—and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of one thousand platinums. His own father did not long survive mine, so great was  his devotion to his paramour, and within half a year from these events, Squire Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand plats would be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Squire Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon settled—he resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand plats. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In NeoLondon I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question—of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances—and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But last cold season he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
“I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken to be tutored at an establishment formed for her in NeoLondon; and last cold season she went with the lady who presided over it, to Mendelsberg; and thither also went Squire Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Yahama Mater, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent to a love affair. She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended escapade, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I wrote to Squire Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Yahama Mater was of course removed from her charge. Squire Wickham’s chief object was unquestionably his perverse desire to despoil youth and innocence (remember that she was only 15!); but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was also a strong inducement. His revenge would have been complete indeed.
“This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Squire Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.
“You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.
“FITZWILLIAM DARCY”


Chapter 36

If Elizabeth, when Squire Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Squire Wickham—when she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth—her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again.
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. She convinced herself that if she could find fault with Darcy’s account of Wickham’s profligacy, she would be justified in dismissing the more horrifying charge of his perversity, his guilt as a debaucher of innocence. With a will to disbelieve, she examined Darcy’s accusations. The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Darcy Pater, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand plats, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality—deliberated on the probability of each statement—but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Squire Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at Squire Wickham’s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his entrance into the Ngala Corps, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Mexistan but what he told himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him at once in the possession of every virtue, both genetic and social. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Squire Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Squire Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’ continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read. Unable to justify an outright dismissal of Darcy’s claims, she girded herself to read the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy. This was unthinkable, impossible… and yet, it received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before. Yesterday, Elizabeth had struggled to believe that some men lusted after young girls who were scarcely even old enough to breed, and today she was asked to believe that the charming Wickham was such a man! Not knowing what to believe, she saw that Darcy had referred her for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs, and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Squire Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.
She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Phillips Mater’s. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a strange young lass such as herself, and wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and remembered the look in his eyes, which had seemed to hold more admiration than appraisal. She noted, too, the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing Squire Darcy—that Squire Darcy might leave the country, but that he should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Squire Darcy’s character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son.
How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss Kwame were now the consequence of desires not solely mercenary but also depraved; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to breed with a fifteen-year-old girl noted for her childishness. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive and she no longer believed he cared at all for her qualifications for motherhood. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Squire Darcy, she could not but allow that Squire Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance—an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways—seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust—anything that spoke him of improper or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued—that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling; that if he were capable of slandering Squire Wickham so grossly, while implicating his own sister in the depravity, his character could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of such calumny, and such an amiable man as Squire Bingley, was incomprehensible.
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.
“How despicably I have acted!” she cried; “I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! Who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blamable mistrust! How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.”
From herself to Jane—from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Squire Darcy’s explanation there had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility.
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned with such mortifying accusations, her confusion was severe. She had never thought that there was anything other than perverse chance at work in granting her family only daughters, but when she considered that Squire Darcy’s suspicions could be well-founded, she faltered. Was her family cursed with a genetic defect? Was it carried by Jane and even herself? Would she and Jane only be able to stay on Titan if they found men who would be content to have a family composed exclusively of girls, content to abandon hope of ever having a son and heir? Do such men exist?
The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial. When she thought of the happiness that Jane had innocently thought to be in her future and the pain that she must feel when she learns the truth, if that truth was as Darcy suspected, and when she thought also of her own bleak prospects, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.
After wandering aimlessly over the black sands for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought—re-considering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return to the little cottage set on a lawn of yellow sand; she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence; Squire Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave—but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to ride after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no object of interest to her, either as her mother’s paramour or as Darcy’s attestant; she could think only of her letter.


Chapter 37

The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Reverend Collins, having been in waiting near the stables, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very good health and in as tolerable spirits. To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her.
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as the mother of her grandnieces and grandnephews; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? How would she have behaved?” were questions with which she amused herself.
Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. “I assure you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”
Reverend Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:
“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay a little longer. Collins Mater will be very glad of your company, I am sure.”
“I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied Elizabeth, “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturnsday.”
“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told Collins Mater so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Bennet Mater could certainly spare you for another fortnight.”
“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.” 
“Oh! Your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as NeoLondon, for I am going there early in Sextober, for a week. In the ferflivver that is a journey of only a few hours, whereas it is a bumpy day’s ride in a camel carriage.” 
“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan.” 
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Where shall you change camels? Oh! Lamark, of course. If you mention my name at the Flying Llama, you will be attended to.” 
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey, and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth found tiresome. She hoped to be invited to enjoy the holodeck again, but refused to bring the subject up for fear of appearing to be a poor country lass who had never before encountered such delights. Of course, that is what she was, but she disdained to leave such an impression. At last Lady Catherine herself offered her guests the entertainment. 
“How about a last turn in the holodeck?” she said. “A safari in Africa would be diverting.” 
“Could we, perhaps, have another visit to the English countryside,” Elizabeth emboldened herself to ask. Africa would no doubt have been exciting, but the English countryside had infiltrated Elizabeth’s spirit and she longed to enjoy its fresh air one last time.
“Another fox hunt!” said Lady Catherine with satisfaction. “Excellent idea!” 
The guests were more comfortable in the saddle this time, comparing virtual horseback favorably to actual camelback. When the rest of the party became engaged in the pursuit of the quarry, Elizabeth hung back and turned her horse onto a side path, where she could enjoy the air, the woods and her own reflections.
Riding alone in that virtual countryside, she was tempted to imagine herself in the England of several centuries previous. How might her situation have been different then! She thought wistfully. In such a world, a man like Darcy might love a girl like Elizabeth and the world would think it nothing strange. In that world, she knew from old Earthan novels, lads and lasses were expected to fall in love while they were both equally innocent and unexperienced, and  expected to breed with a single person for an entire lifetime. What a pretty thought! But, of course, that was only fiction. The reality was not so pretty, Elizabeth remembered. By the time her ancestors had left the Earth, breeding contracts, “marriages”, had lasted an average of only 10 years, ending frequently in bitterness and sometimes in violence. That was no way to raise children, thought Elizabeth, grateful, for once, for the wisdom of Titan’s governance. On Titan, we provide stability for our children with amicable breeding partnerships and still have time for love, though later in life.
For those that are able to find an amicable breeding partner, that is.
As for the rest…
Until recently, Elizabeth had never seriously doubted that she, Jane and her sisters would all be able to find financially stable, pleasant and genetically well-endowed co-parents. Now, however, she was plagued with doubts. Did their genomes really harbour a dark secret? Were they all doomed to be partnered with men flawed enough to be desperate? Or, worse still, not to be partnered at all? With the precipitous mortality rate of miners and astronauts, even desperate men were in short supply. Would they be forced to leave the safety and familiarity of Titan to take their chances on the wild frontier of the new colonies? And had she proudly and piously dismissed the only opportunity she would ever be offered for a normal life?
She thought again of Darcy’s letter, which she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She meditated on every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. Yes, he could have provided her the opportunity to stay in Titan, but at what cost? His love was of that excessive kind that could only end in tragedy. To have a normal life would be to pair with someone who admired and respected her, not to enter into a frightening pact of passion with a man would sacrifice all he valued and esteemed for the chance to breed with her.
Her case was hopeless, she was sure. No rational man would take her, and to partner with an irrational man was to play dice with the devil. Dismissing thoughts of her own future, she thought about her sisters.
Poor Jane! Squire Darcy’s explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His admiration was proved to have been sincere and appropriate, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived by some quirk of her family’s genetic makeup!
Jane, however, was so nubile, so motherly and so accomplished in the arts of running a household, that she would surely be able to contract with some man who, being beget with flaws himself, would be willing to accept a future deprived of male offspring. A bleak future, perhaps, but a future, nonetheless.
Catherine and Lydia, on the other hand, had even less to recommend themselves. They were nubile and spirited, but they would do nothing to improve themselves. They refused to take seriously any of the arts that would advertise their genetic fitness, nor would they learn any of the practical skills of running a household. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an astronaut in Mandalay, they would flirt with him. But not even an astronaut would be willing to offer a breeding contract to a lass that was not able to promise him a son.
And then there was Mary. Mary did not even possess the abundant nubility and spirit of her younger sisters. Her only hope had been to attract a serious man who valued intelligence more than well-developed secondary sexual characteristics or charm. But such a man, such an intelligent, earnest and discerning man, would never be desperate enough to accept a lass with a blighted genome.
When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to  tolerably cheerful.
Her unpleasant reflections were interrupted at last by the return of the fox-hunting party. Lady Catherine and her other guests were all in high spirits, having caught and de-tailed a virtual fox in record time. Closing up the holodeck, they returned upstairs and celebrated with cocktails of cactus juice and fermented camel milk.
When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hanoi again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to Elizabeth and Charlotte.


Chapter 38

On Saturnsday morning Elizabeth and Reverend Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.
“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether. Collins Mater has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms with few electronics and no robots, and the little we see of the world, must make Hanoi extremely dull to a young lass like yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly.”
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make her feel the obliged. Reverend Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling solemnity replied:
“It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hanoi visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are of our entertainments at Rosings.”
Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. “Indeed our visits to Rosings were among the highlights of my visit here,” she said, thinking about her rides in the virtual English countryside.
“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into Mexistan. I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so, and that your relatives will be pleased to hear of our successful pregnancy. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in breeding.  Our geneticist assures us that dear Charlotte and I are remarkably well-matched. We seem to have been designed for each other.”
Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add that she rejoiced in the early success of his breeding efforts. Privately she reflected that it was a comfort too know that Charlotte was freed for some time from the duty of sharing his bed. She was not sorry to have the civilities interrupted by the lady in question. Poor Charlotte! It was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her pregnancy, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms. A week ago, Elizabeth’s sympathy for Charlotte had been unqualified, but now, fearing for her own future, Elizabeth wondered if Charlotte’s fate might in the end prove kinder than her own.
At length the camel carriage arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by Reverend Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at Liqua in the dusty season, and his compliments to the Gardiners, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.
“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here.”
Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off.
“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems but a day or two since we first came! And yet how many things have happened!”
“A great many indeed,” said her companion with a sigh.
“We have dined nine times at Rosings, and played in the holodeck twice! How much I shall have to tell!”
Elizabeth added privately, “And how much I shall have to conceal!” Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and after a wearisome journey of twelve hours across the desert, they reached Gardiner Pater’s house, where they were to remain a few days.
Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at Liqua there would be leisure enough for observation.
It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Liqua, before she told her sister of Squire Darcy’s proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate; she could hardly discuss the proposal without mentioning the dark suspicions that Darcy harbored concerning the  genetic soundness of Bennet family, and she was determined not to burden Jane with all the attendant horror of this possibility until she had confronted her father on the matter. She must know the truth.


Chapter 39

It was the second week in Quintober, in which the three young lasses set out together from Lizardneck Lane for the town of Bukit Lawang, in Mexistan; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Bennet Pater’s carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite haberdashers, watching the sentinel on guard, and carving a capybara.
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with a capybara dressed with herbs and yams, exclaiming, “Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?”
“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia, “but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then, showing her purchases—”Look here, I have bought this armlet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make I nice pair of anklets out of it.”
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, “Oh! But there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier gold filament to redesign it with, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this clear season, after the Ngaya have left Mexistan, and they are going in a fortnight.”
“Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
“They are going to be undergoing training near Orleans; and I do so want Mamma to take us all there for the cold season! She is going there anyway to visit a paramour, and it would be such a delicious scheme if she were to take us with her; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all! Only think what a miserable cold season else we shall have!”
“Yes,” thought Elizabeth, “that would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Orleans, and a whole campful of astronauts, to us, who have been overset already by one poor aeronautics corps, and the monthly balls of Mandalay!”
“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down at table. “What do you think? It is excellent news—capital news—and about a certain person we all like!”
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:
“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger of Wickham’s offering a contract to Mary Kwame. There’s for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”
“And Mary Kwame is safe!” added Elizabeth.
“Apparently her father said she was too young for breeding! Have you ever heard of anything more ridiculous!”
“But she is too young,” said Elizabeth seriously. “She is only fifteen.” 
“Only fifteen! I am fifteen,” said Lydia proudly, “And I’m sure my reproductive system is fully mature!” 
“Yes, but Mary Kwame looks even younger,” said Kitty. “I saw her at Nara. She’s just a skinny little freckled thing. Certainly no suitable mother for Wickham’s children!” 
Elizabeth silently reflected how this incident further verified Darcy’s story. She no longer had any doubt as to his veracity.
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, were seated in it.
“How nicely we are all crammed in,” cried Lydia. “Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Did you have any chance to display your nubility? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a breeding contract before you came back. Jane will be getting quite desperate soon, I declare. She is almost six-and-twenty!? She’ll have to start looking for jobs on Ganymede soon! Lord, how worried I should be of not having a contract before six-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to get contracts as quickly as you can. She says Lizzy had better have taken Reverend Collins; but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! How I should like to be a mother before any of you; and then I would have my own house and be the queen of the family. Dear me! We had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Forster Mater promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the bye, Forster Mater and me are such friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne – one of the astronauts, you know – in woman’s clothes on purpose to pass for a lass, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Forster Mater, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Wickham and Santiago, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! How I laughed! I thought I should have died. Only Denny recognized him. He’d seen him dressed up as a lass before, so that wasn’t fair. Apparently astronauts do that quite often when they have a party. I guess they get bored when there are no ladies around!”
With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Liqua. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.
Their reception at home was most kind. Bennet Mater rejoiced to see that Jane’s outward displays of fertility were not diminished by her inward distress; and more than once during dinner did Bennet Pater say voluntarily to Elizabeth:
“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare of her eldest daughter and the progress of her pregnancy; Bennet Mater was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.
“Oh! Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the shutters, and pretended there was nobody in the carriage; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the carriage. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! We talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”
To this Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for me—I should infinitely prefer a book.”
But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Mandalay, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the astronauts. There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Squire Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to her of the corps approaching removal was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go—and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.
She had not been many hours at home before she found an opportunity to confront her father in his den.
“Did you have encounter any trouble at Hanoi,” said her father with concern. “You seemed a bit serious at lunch.”
“There has been something on my mind,” Elizabeth admitted.
“Didn’t they treat you well? Did Lady Catherine look down her nose at you?” “It’s nothing like that,” Elizabeth said, trying to decide how to broach the subject without mentioning Darcy.
“Well what is it then?” said her father encouragingly.
“Only this,” said Elizabeth with determination. “I need to know the truth from you – why do you and my mother have only girl children.”
“Well!” said her father. “What’s put that into your head? Has someone been making enquiries into your suitability as a breeding partner,” her father said with a chuckle.
“How can you laugh!” said Elizabeth, shocked. “How can you be amused at the prospect of your daughters being unable to form breeding contracts because of an inherited genetic defect!”
“Lizzy!” said her father in a gentle voice, surprised at her vehemence and the seriousness of the conclusion she had jumped to. “It is nothing so serious. Nothing that can affect the breeding prospects of my girls.”
“It isn’t?” said Elizabeth, hoping, and yet fearing to hope, that this was true.
“No, not at all! The defect is in me,” said her father. “In my Y chromosome. I can’t father sons, but my daughters are perfectly fine.”
“Oh thank goodness,” said Elizabeth, sitting down in relief. She paused to take in this new information.
“But why have kept this from us?,” she said with a distressed voice, “why not let us know?”
“I didn’t think it of any importance,” said her father. “It doesn’t affect you, you see. You would clear any pre-breeding genetic analysis.”
“But father,” said Elizabeth, “Don’t you realize the cloud of suspicion you have put this family under?”
“Have I?” said Bennet Pater. “Who is suspicious?” 
“Everyone!” said Elizabeth. “Everyone can see that there are no boys in our family and so everyone has reason to think that there is a genetic flaw in our heritage!” 
“But that’s ridiculous,” said her father. “You never suspected before, and you’ve been in this family all of your life.” 
“But I’m not a man looking for a lass to bear his children!” said Elizabeth. “Of course such men think of such things!” 
“I see,” said her father gravely. “Yes, I see. That is a problem.” Bennet Pater pondered.
“I tell you what I’ll do,” he said with sudden inspiration. “I’ll tell Senator Lucas about my broken chromosome. Between him and his gossipy co-parent, the whole Colony of Mexistan will know about it before the end of the week!’
“Yes, that’s a good idea,” said Elizabeth with an attempt at a smile.
“I hope I haven’t inadvertently obstructed the progress of any breeding contracts,” said her father, uncertainly.
“No, don’t, worry about that” said Elizabeth. “There are no breeding contracts in the offing.” She felt that it would be useless to blame her father for his insensibility, but she bitterly reflected on what her father’s thoughtlessness had cost Jane. If only Squire Bingley had known that Jane’s genes were as flawless as Jane herself.


Chapter 40

Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened no longer needed to be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Squire Darcy and herself.
Miss Bennet’s astonishment was considerable, though somewhat lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural. “As shocking as it is for a mature man to fall in love with a lass,” said Jane, “it is perhaps more understandable that he could have fallen for you. With your maturity, intelligence and natural elegance, you are more like a woman than a lass.” She was sorry that Squire Darcy should have developed such inappropriate sentiments; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him.
“His giving way to such a scandalous passion was wrong,” said she, “and certainly ought not to have admitted; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment!”
“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”
“Blame you! Oh, no.”
“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?” 
“No—I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.” “But you will know it, when I tell you what happened the very next day.” She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane! Who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one without involving the other.
“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy’s; but you shall do as you choose.”
It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.
“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Squire Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! And with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too! And having to relate such a thing of his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it so.”
“Oh! No, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.”
“Poor Wickham! There is such an expression of goodness in his countenance! Such an openness and gentleness in his manner!”
“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it.”
“I never thought Squire Darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you used to do.”
“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.” 
“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat the matter as you do now.” 
“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! How I wanted you!” 
“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Squire Darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved.” 
“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintances in general understand Wickham’s character.” 
Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your opinion?” 
“That it ought not to be attempted. Squire Darcy has not authorised me to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to his conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Squire Darcy is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in Mandalay to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he really is.” 
Elizabeth paused. “I can only fervently hope that he does not ruin the life of any other young lass, but with nothing more than rumour on our side, I don’t see how we can prevent it.” 
“You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to reform his character. We must not make him desperate.” 
“I don’t know that a man like that can reform his own character,” said Elizabeth with foreboding. “But perhaps he can learn to suppress his proclivities.” 
The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Squire Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. It would perhaps be some comfort to Jane to know that Squire Bingley had been dissuaded from breeding with her due to a misunderstanding about the nature of their family’s genetic inheritance, but the bitterness of losing Bingley because of the stubborn obliviousness of their own father to the delicacy of their situation would cause more pain than it alleviated. “And then,” she thought, “perhaps Bingley will reconsider her as a co-parent when he learns the truth that is now to be promulgated by the loose-lipped Lucases. If that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!” 
She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and, from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than most first attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and to her reputation.
“Well, Lizzy,” said Bennet Mater one day, “what is your opinion now of this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in NeoLondon. Well, he is a very undeserving young man—and I do not suppose there’s the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming to Netherfield again in the cold season; and I have inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know.”
“I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.” 
“Oh well! It is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though I shall always say he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure that when Jane is a mature woman unencumbered by small children, Bingley will wish to be her paramour and she will refuse him; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.” 
But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from such distant possibilities, she made no answer.
“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in their housekeeping, I dare say.”
“No, nothing at all.”
“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes, they will take care not to outrun their income. They will never be distressed for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often talk of filling Liqua with their progeny when your father is dead. They look upon it as quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”
“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.” 
“No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate which devolves on them as a consequence of a shamefully sexist system, so much the better. I should be embarrassed to benefit from such injustice.”


Chapter 41

The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was the last of the Ngala Corps stay in Mandalay, and all the young lasses in the neighbourhood, and all the mature women as well, were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family.
“Good Heaven! What is to become of us? What are we to do?” would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?”
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion, thirty years ago.
“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel Miller’s aeronautics corps went away. I thought I should have broken my heart.”
“I am sure I shall break mine,” said Lydia. “If we could but go to Orleans!” she continued.
“Oh, yes!—if you could but go to Orleans! But Colonel Fitzwilliam wants to have me alone with him. He is quite insistent on it!”
“A visit to the carnival would set me up forever.” “And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do me a great deal of good,” added Kitty.
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Liqua House. But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from Forster Mater, the breeding partner of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Orleans. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, who was pregnant with her first child and thus eager to enjoy her last few months of freedom. A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their three months’ acquaintance they had been intimate two.
The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Forster Mater, the delight of Bennet Mater, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.
“I cannot see why Forster Mater should not ask me as well as Lydia,” said she, “Though I am not her particular friend. I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Forster Mater, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Orleans, where the temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:
“Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.”
“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and imprudent manner—nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair.”
“Already arisen?” repeated Bennet Pater. “What, has she frightened away some prospective breeding partner? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”
“Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not of particular, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia’s character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most ignorant and empty-headed lass that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; she will be judged to have inherited the dullest of genes and to have no qualification beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, for all her exuberant display of secondary sexual characteristics, she will end up wholly unable to attract an offer of a breeding contract from any but the most desperate. In this danger Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! My dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?”
Bennet Pater saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and affectionately taking her hand said in reply:
“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of—or I may say, three—very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Liqua if Lydia does not go to Orleans. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily from too uninfluential a family to be an object of prey to anybody. At Orleans she will having even less success in parading her nubility than she has been here. The officers will find lasses better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest of her life.”
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Orleans comprised every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, ferris wheels festooned with ribbons, dances in the gaily lit streets, games of chance and skill, thrilling rides and, finally, the space agency milling with astronauts. She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the launch pads – rockets stretching forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowds of young and virile men; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated in a control room, displaying her fertility to at least six astronauts at once.
Had she known her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? But she was entirely ignorant of what had passed; and her raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of her leaving home.
Elizabeth was now to see Squire Wickham for the last time. Having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; she had even become used to the repugnance that had completely replaced her former partiality. She had learnt to detect, in the same gentle attentions which had first delighted her, an unseemliness that disgusted her.
On the very last day of the Ngala Corps remaining at Mandalay, he dined, with other of the officers, at Liqua; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hanoi, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Squire Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment’s recollection and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:
“How long did you say he was at Rosings?”
“Nearly three weeks.”
“And you saw him frequently?”
“Yes, almost every day.”
“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.” 
“Yes, very different. But I think Squire Darcy improves upon acquaintance.” 
“Indeed!” cried Squire Wickham with a look which did not escape her. “And pray, may I ask?—” But checking himself, he added, in a careless tone, “Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style?—for I dare not hope,” he continued in a lower and more serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”
 “Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very much what he ever was.”
 While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added: “When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that his mind or his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.” 
Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents: “You, who so well know my feeling towards Squire Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right. His pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart.” 
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Forster Mater to Mandalay, from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Bennet Mater promised to meet Lydia for lunch the following week during her own visit to Orleans, and concluded with effusive good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive injunctions that she should not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible—advice which there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.


Chapter 42

Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of breeding arrangements or domestic comfort. She had never before understood why her father had chosen such a silly, empty-headed lass to bear his children but now she realized that with his defective Y-chromosome, he had had little choice. Her mother must have been desperate indeed to agree to such a precarious future as a life with no sons would bring. The contract was agreed to without any real affection on either side, and arrangements for child-rearing had to be conducted in a relationship almost completely devoid of respect or esteem. But Bennet Pater was not of a disposition to complain of the disappointments fate had burdened him with. In his youth, he found distraction in a string of attractive paramours, but as he grew older, he found himself fonder of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his co-parent he was very little otherwise indebted, than to her having borne him Elizabeth and Jane. As to his three younger daughters, he felt little to be grateful for other than the occasional amusement their ignorance and folly afforded. This is not the sort of happiness which a father would in general wish; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of Bennet Pater’s behaviour as a father. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of obligation and decorum which, in exposing his own children to contempt, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the such children, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters and, through the development of demonstrable accomplishments, enhanced their appearance of genetic quality.
When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the aeronautics corps. Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home, though there was the welcome respite gained by her mother’s visit to Orleans with Colonel Fitzwilliam, this relief was more than outweighed by the presence of a sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by her prolonged immersion within a throng of displaced astronauts. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had been looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity—to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Methane Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”
When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely; but her emails were always long expected, and always very short. Her letters to Elizabeth and Jane contained little else than that they were just returned from the carnival, where such and such astronauts had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful trifles as made her quite wild; that she had a new sari, or a new veil, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Forster Mater called her, and they were going off to a street dance; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less to be learnt—for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of exclamation marks and emojis to be made public.
After the first fortnight of her absence and the return of Bennet Mater, health, good humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Liqua. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the dusty season came back again, and the finery and engagements of the cold  arose. Bennet Mater was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of Sextober, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Mandalay without tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the following Bacchanalia she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an astronaut above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the Space Agency, another aeronautics corps should be quartered in Mandalay.
The time fixed for the beginning of their eastern tour was now fast approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Gardiner Mater, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Gardiner Pater would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in Heptober, and must be in NeoLondon again within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Methane Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther eastwards than New Arabia. In that colony there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Gardiner Mater it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the treasures potentially hidden in the caverns near the Methane Lakes.
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing the Methane Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied—and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.
With the mention of New Arabia there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his colony with impunity, and visit the odd crater or two, without his perceiving me.”
The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and the Gardiners with their four children did at length appear at Liqua. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose motherliness and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way—teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Liqua, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain—that of suitableness of companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences—cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure—and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad.
It is not the object of this work to give a description of New Arabia, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay; the cryovolcano at Cairo, the string of small impact craters between Jericho and Monoqua, the Earthtown at Kingston, the methane river and delta, etc. are sufficiently known. A small part of New Arabia is all the present concern. To the little town of Alpaca, the scene of Gardiner Mater’s former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated within five miles of Alpaca. It was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Gardiner Mater expressed an inclination to see the place again. Gardiner Pater declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?” said her aunt; “a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.”
Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after Rosings, she had no interest in seeing more elegant furnishings, robot servants or electronic picture windows.
Gardiner Mater abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a technologically enhanced and well-furnished house,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the only real woods in the Colony.”
Elizabeth said no more—but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Squire Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the innkeeper whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? What was the name of its proprietor? And, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the cold season? A most welcome negative followed the last question—and her alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme. Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.


Chapter 43
Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.
The park was very large, and contained, as Gardiner Mater had promised, one of the only real woods on Titan. They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful park stretching over a wide extent. The woods were planted with fig trees, monkey-puzzles and sausage trees interspersed with flowering cacti, creeping jenny and other wild blossoms, all genetically engineering to thrive in Titan’s terraformed climate, though maintained only at considerable cost.  The effect was reminiscent of the English woods that Elizabeth had experienced in the holodeck at Rosings, though the trees were less leafy and the air was dryer. Even the ground under the camels’ feet, composed of a mixture of common black sand and rare white sand, evoked an English soil.
Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a large holographic projection of verdant hills; and in front, a stream was artfully constructed to look natural, its banks neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen a place more exotically Earth-like or more beautiful. They were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the innkeeper had been mistaken. On knocking at the door, they were admitted by an elderly woman who introduced herself as Squire Darcy’s maternal grandmother, Reynolds Mater. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
“And in this place,” thought she, “I might have been enscounced! With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own son’s future estate, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,”—recollecting herself—”that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”
This was a lucky recollection—it saved her from something very like regret.
She longed to inquire of Reynolds Mater whether her grandson were really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Reynolds Mater replied that he was, adding, “But we expect him tomorrow, with a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture window. She approached and saw a scene with two little boys playing cowboys and aliens on the lawn outside. It was Squire Wickham and Squire Darcy, explained Reynolds Mater, recorded about twenty years ago.
Her aunt said they were adorable, and commented how wonderful it must be to savor this idyllic scene of the past whenever you glanced out of a window.
Another picture window showed a young man in the winner’s circle after a camel race, and Reynolds Mater told them it was Squire Wickham, the son of her Darcy Pater’s estate manager, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”
Gardiner Mater looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.
“And that,” said Reynolds Pater, pointing to another of the picture windows, “is my grandson giving a speech in the Senate. It was taken at the same time as the other—about eight years ago.”
“I have heard much of your grandson’s fine person,” said Gardiner Mater, looking at the picture window; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether or not he has changed.”
Reynolds Mater respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her grandson.
“Does that young lass know Fitzwilliam?”
Elizabeth coloured, and said: “A little.”
“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman?” 
“Yes, very handsome.”
“I am sure I know none so handsome. In the gallery up stairs you will see some finer, larger picture windows with scenes from the Earth and various colonies, as well as oil paintings of everyone in the family. This room was Darcy Pater’s favourite room, and these picture windows are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them.”
Reynolds Mater then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, taken when she was only eight years old, playing with a pet pig.
“And is Miss Darcy as genetically well-endowed as her brother?” said Gardiner Mater.
“Oh! Yes—the most nubile young lass that ever was seen; and so accomplished!—She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her—a present from Fitzwilliam; she comes here to-morrow with him.”
Gardiner Pater, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Reynolds Mater, with pride and attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her grandchildren.
“Is Squire Darcy much at Pemberley in the course of the year?” 
“Not so much as I could wish; but I dare say he may spend half his time here; and Georgiana is always down for the cold season.” 
“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Mendelsberg.” 
“If Squire Darcy would breed, you might see more of him.” 
“Yes, but I do not know when that will be. I do not know who is good enough for him to breed with.” 
Gardiner Pater and Gardiner Mater smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.” 
“I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth put this down to a grandmother’s natural bias, but she listened with astonishment as Reynolds Mater added, “I have never known a cross word from him in my life. Even as a two-year-old he was more temperate than terrible.” 
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying: “There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in having such a grandson.” 
“Yes, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.” 
Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Squire Darcy?” thought she.
“His father was an excellent man,” said Gardiner Pater.
“Yes, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him—just as affable to the poor.” 
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Reynolds Mater could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of other pictures windows, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain. Gardiner Pater, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her grandson, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
“He is the best of the Colony’s hereditary Governors,” said she, “that ever lived; not like other wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one person in the government but will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”
“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.
“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”
“Perhaps we might be deceived.”
“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.” 
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when last at Pemberley.
“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.
Reynolds Mater anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her.”
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained be shown.
In the latter were impressive views in the picture windows of beautiful scenery from every continent of the Earth, as well as scenes from Ganymede, Callisto and Earth’s moon.  These, Reynolds Mater explained, were not on five minute loops like the small picture windows downstairs, but rather were stored with several years of footage that showed the natural changes of their locations in real time.
In the gallery there were many family portraits done in oil, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her—and she beheld a striking resemblance to Squire Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Reynolds Mater informed them that it had been painted in his father’s lifetime.
There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Reynolds Mater was of no trifling nature. Who knew his character better than his own grandmother? Every idea that had been brought forward by the Reynolds Mater was favourable to his character, and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of Reynolds, were consigned over to the robot gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjecturing as to size of the estate’s robotic staff, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Squire Darcy, the robot gardener’s greeting confirmed it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left Liqua, and of her having stayed in New Arabia, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.
At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! Why did she come? Or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived—that moment alighted from his camel carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered—what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!—but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address at the stables of Reverend Collins, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Squire Darcy then was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind—in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been that in his voice which was not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure. Of course, she did not wish him to be in love with her, she could not wish that his mind was still troubled by a deviant passion, but it was tempting to imagine that his inappropriate ardency could cool to something like respectable admiration and affection.
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the distant holographic hills, and occasionally part of the stream. Gardiner Pater expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round. That settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the rocky canyon allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Gardiner Mater, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the camel cart as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Gardiner Pater, was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some fish in the water that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Squire Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk here being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said no more. She would not allow him to suppose that she was imagining Pemberley as a playground for her children.
Gardiner Mater was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of good pedigree.”
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was surprised by the connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with Gardiner Pater. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush, though were Gardiner Pater to succumb to an asthma attack, his inferior genetics could not be concealed. She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.
The conversation soon turned upon fish, since Gardiner Pater had never before seen fish swimming freely in a stream and was fascinated with their beauty and grace. He heard Squire Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to have a turn in his holodeck, which was attached to a large pool in the basement of Pemberley. Gardiner Pater was urged to visit at his leisure to experience snorkelling in the Maldives, the Great Barrier Reef or the Galapagos Islands. Gardiner Mater, who was walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for me—it cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hanoi could not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.” And though she repeated to herself that such enduring love in the face of such rejection was impossible, and undesirable, she could not help but find the possibility extremely flattering.
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Gardiner Mater, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her co-parent’s. Squire Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence, the lass spoke first. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected—”for your grandmother,” she added, “informed us that you would certainly not be here till tomorrow; and indeed, before we left Beihai, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.” 
He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business with the estate had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early tomorrow,” he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you—Squire Bingley and his sisters.”
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Squire Bingley’s name had been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind was not very differently engaged.
“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Alpaca?”
The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment and frustrated ardour had not made him think really ill of her.
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the camel cart, the Gardiners were half a quarter of a mile behind.
He then asked her to walk into the house—but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of impact craters and cryovolcanos with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was over. On the Gardiners’s coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Squire Darcy handed the ladies into the cart; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected. “He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.
“There is something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her aunt, “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with his grandmother, that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it.”
“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”
“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so conspicuously genetically superior as Wickham; or, rather, he has not Wickham’s physique, for there is no sign of genetic flaw in his constitution. But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?”
Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked him better when they had met in Darwin than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning.
“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore, as much as I would love to snorkel in his holodeck, I shall not take him at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his estate.”
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing.
“From what we have seen of him,” continued Gardiner Mater, “I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a generous grandson, I suppose, and that in the eye of a maternal grandmother comprehends every virtue.”
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Darwin, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Mexistan. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.
Gardiner Mater was surprised and concerned; but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her co-parent all the interesting spots in its environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance. Gardiner Pater meanwhile set off in quest of a former paramour and his evening was likewise spent in pleasurable intercourse with an old companion. Gardiner Mater, being not yet of an age for paramours, was somewhat envious of Gardiner Pater’s good fortune, but she bid him all the delights commonly attendant upon such an engagement.
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these social activities; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Squire Darcy’s civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.


Chapter 43

The whole of the next morning was spent at the inn in Alpaca in the company of Gardiner Mater’s old acquaintances and Gardiner Pater’s sometime paramour.  They had been walking about the place, and were just returning to the inn to dress themselves for dining, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lass in a handsome camel carriage driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognized the senatorial insignia, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing that Squire Darcy was interested in breeding with their niece. While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth’s feelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her being at Alpaca, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance motherly and graceful. Her features were less perfectly regular than those of her brother; but there was no trace of genetic inferiority in them and her face expressed sense and good humour, while her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Squire Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.
They had not long been together before Squire Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humored ease that he had ever done.
To Gardiner Mater and Gardiner Pater he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just arisen of Squire Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from those inquiries the full conviction that a breeding contract was likely forthcoming. In the lass, they saw every sign of infatuation; and the gentleman was overflowing with admiration and approval.
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors; she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavored to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh! How ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was assessing the quality of her family’s genes. But, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behavior to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. Every word and look between them spoke to a relationship like that of a brother to a sister. Squire Bingley displayed an avuncular kind of amiable regard and affectionate amusement towards this 16-year-old girl that made it impossible to believe that he would consider breeding with her. On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured by interest, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply, he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of Nonember, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters were at Liqua. There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning.
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Squire Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace—when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in Hanoi Parsonage—the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavors, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.
Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose to depart, Squire Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing the Gardiners, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Gardiner Mater looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her co-parent, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to make after all their Mexistan friends. Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favorable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
But she had no reason to fear her aunt and uncle’s curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Squire Darcy than they had before any idea of; and it was evident that he was considering her as a potential breeding partner. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
Of Squire Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his grandmother’s report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Mexistan to which he was known would not have recognized it for Squire Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing his grandmother; and they soon became sensible that his grandmother’s good opinion must be the result of a generous and affectionate indulgence by her grandson that spoke well to his character. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their Alpaca friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the neighbouring inhabitants to a man who had such a genetic and social pedigree to be proud of. It was acknowledged, however, that he was able governer, and did much to promote the prosperity of the Colony.
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting New Arabia, he had left many debts behind him, which Squire Darcy afterwards discharged.
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in his favor, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be longer denied. She was no longer simply and straightforwardly appalled by the expression of his illicit attraction to her. She was less disturbed by the idea than she had been previously, and more flattered. She also found herself grateful. Grateful that the intensity of his passion had not turned to equally intense hate or resentment. Grateful that there was a purity in his affection for her that allowed him to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but admiration—for it must be attributed to a rationality and control of mind that had cooled his dangerously heated emotions; and as such its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far this change in him could develop. Could his ardent love for her transform into the type of respectful admiration that could form the basis of an intimate friendship?
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s in coming to see them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.
Gardiner Pater left them soon after breakfast. The snorkeling scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.


Chapter 45


Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her had originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how much civility on that lass’s side the acquaintance would now be renewed.
On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose southern aspect rendered it delightful for the cold season. Its windows opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the holographic wooded hills behind the house, and of the fig trees and monkey puzzles which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.
In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting with Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in NeoLondon. Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended with all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Gardiner Mater and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
By Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and, on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Patel Mater, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between her and Gardiner Mater, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.
Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much. Her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. Without no outward acknowledgement of the implication that her family’s health was precarious, she answered with indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of robot servants with fish and shrimp from the Pemberley stream and a variety of the fruits from the Pemberley woods, including sausage fruits, figs and tiny, delicious wild strawberries. There was now employment for the whole party—for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful display of rare delicacies soon collected them round the table.
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Squire Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he had come.
He had been some time with Gardiner Pater with whom he had been virtually snorkeling in the real pool in the basement of the house, and had left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behavior when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her hopes of breeding with Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility:
“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the Ngala Corps removed from Mandalay? They must be a great loss to your family.”
In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name; but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress; but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s attempted seduction. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except to Elizabeth; and, though Georgiana was the injured party, concern for her reputation resulted in the concealment of Wickham’s wickedness from the world.
Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted Darcy’s emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while Squire Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s person, behavior, and dress, and, of course, on the certainty of her defective genetic makeup. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother’s recommendation was enough to ensure her favor; his judgment could not err. And he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely, amiable and healthy. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.
“How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Squire Darcy,” she cried; “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the dusty season. She is grown so brown and coarse! Her skin is losing its lustre. In a few years she’ll be hard put to convince anyone that she is still of prime breeding age!”
However little Squire Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of traveling in the cold season.
“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character—there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all. You would think she would at least try to enhance her lacklustre secondary sexual characteristics, but she doesn’t seem to care.”
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued:
“I remember, when we first knew her in Mexistan, how amazed we all were to find that she was reputed to be a particularly nubile; and I particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘She nubile!—I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you  once thought she would make a tolerable breeding partner for some man with limited prospects.”
“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but that was only when I first saw her, for it is many months since I have considered her as one of the most nubile lasses of my acquaintance.”
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.
Gardiner Mater and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them both. The look and behavior of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, even of his holodeck—of everything but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Gardiner Mater thought of him, and Gardiner Mater would have been highly gratified by her niece’s beginning the subject.


Chapter 46

Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding an email from Jane on their first arrival at Alpaca; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two emails from her at once, one of which had been delayed by a systems error.
They had just been preparing to walk as the emails arrived; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one that had been delayed must first be attended to, having been written two days prior. It had been written in evident agitation and was to this effect:
“Dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you—be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An email came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to NeoLondon with one of his astronauts; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected,as Lydia confided in her that Wickham wished her to run off with him to meet with a geneticist and then settle a breeding contract with him. I am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood. That he has an unnatural fondness for young girls now appears to be undeniable, but this perversity will not necessarily make him a bad father or unsuitable co-parent. Although her family has little to offer, Lydia is a well-grown girl who is certainly capable of bearing him healthy young, so I doubt anyone will suspect anything untoward in their match. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturnsday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his co-parent, informing her of their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I, am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have written.”
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this email instantly opened the other with the utmost impatience, and read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.
“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried message; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as a breeding contract between Squire Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has been settled, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to NeoLondon. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Orleans the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s short letter to Foster Mater gave them to understand that they were going to consult a geneticist, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that Wickham never intended to do that, or to contract with Lydia at all, which was repeated to Colonel Forster, who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from Orleans intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Silverstone, but no further. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the NeoLondon road. I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that side of NeoLondon, Colonel Forster came on into Mexistan, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Isis and Artemis, but without any success—no such people had been seen to pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Liqua, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and Forster Mater, but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. It is inconceivable that Wickham’s plan could consist only of seducing Lydia and then abandoning her to a hopeless future; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia’s connections, which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel Forster is not disposed to depend upon their contract; he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared Wickham was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed their plans; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of the former. My father is going to NeoLondon with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Orleans again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my uncle’s advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”
“Oh! Where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she opened the door, she saw Squire Darcy just approaching. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Gardiner Pater this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.”
“Good God! What is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, “You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself. Let me go after Gardiner Pater for you.”
“But I don’t know where he’s gone,” answered Elizabeth.
“Then there’s no use for you to be chasing around blindly for him,” said Squire Darcy. “You’d better wait here for him to come back.”
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. “I suppose they will return soon,” she concluded reluctantly.
She sat down, unable to support herself, and looked so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, “Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”
“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from Liqua.”
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger sister has left all her friends—has run off with an astronaut; in fact, she has thrown herself into the power of—of Squire Wickham. They are gone off together from Orleans. You know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can restrain him from—she is lost for ever.”
Darcy was fixed in astonishment. “When I consider,” she added in a yet more agitated voice, “that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only—some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all—all too late now.”
“I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved—shocked. But is it certain—absolutely certain?”
“Oh, yes! They left Orleans together on Sunday night, and were traced almost to NeoLondon, but not beyond; there is no news from her of any legal arrangements.”
“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?” “My father is gone to NeoLondon, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But nothing can be done—I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!” Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
“When my eyes were opened to his real character—Oh! Had I known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not—I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. She should have rejoiced that he had mastered his unseemly passion, but the effect on her was quite to the contrary. She found that she was sorry to see this passion die, unseemly though it was. She realized, with distress, that her respect for propriety had not prevented her from growing attached to his affection for her. In short, she became aware as she never had before that she longed for him to love her, against her own will she longed for it, though she knew it to be wrong, and the very circumstance that made her acknowledge this desire also necessitated that this desire must be in vain.
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia—the humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, “I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”
“Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.”
He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious, parting look, went away.
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in New Arabia; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.
She saw him go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business. That Lydia was ruined she could not doubt. At sixteen years of age, Lydia legally had another fourteen years to find a breeding partner before she would be exiled from Titan, but with such a scandal in her past, it would be all but impossible for her to find anyone who would be willing to contract with her. Moreover, as Darcy’s change of countenance had brought home to Elizabeth, Lydia’s sisters would also be tainted by the scandal. Who would want to mix their genes with those of a family capable of engendering such foolishness? One after another, beginning with Jane, they would be thrown off Titan for failing to find a mate. Poor innocent Jane would suffer for Lydia’s folly. The injustice burned in Elizabeth’s heart. I will not let Jane go alone, she thought with determination. We will leave together when Jane is thirty, and together we will face the wild frontier of Callisto or Ganymede, doing whatever we have to do to get by. Jane could never survive such an ordeal by herself, Elizabeth thought, but the two of them together could make some kind of life. Bitterly she thought that by the time Lydia suffered the punishment of her actions and was forced to leave Titan, she and Jane would have had almost ten years to establish a home and a way of life in their new situation. And Lydia, spoiled her whole life, and now despoiled, and presently the spoiler of all her sisters’ opportunities for happiness, would suffer the least from her own actions, for by the time she was exiled, her sisters would all be waiting for her. And in spite of her present anger, Elizabeth knew that after fourteen years had passed, she and Jane would welcome Lydia into their purgatory with all the warmth and comfort they could muster.
She put these morbid daydreams aside and turned her thoughts to the immediate situation at home. She was wild to be there with Jane—to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. The Gardiners had hurried back in alarm, having met Darcy on the road and told of her desperate need for their assistance. Elizabeth eagerly communicated the cause of her distress, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy.— Though Lydia had never been a favourite with them, Gardiner Pater and Gardiner Mater perceived immediately that not Lydia alone, but all were concerned in the ensuing disgrace; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Gardiner Pater promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as soon as possible.
Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Alpaca, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Gardiner Pater meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the camel cart, and on the road to Liqua.

 
Chapter 47

“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel’s family, that I am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends would not step forward? Could he expect to escape the consequences of the law? His temptation is not adequate to the risk!”
“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.
“But I am not so sure,” she continued with more solemn reflection. “He is perhaps counting on his misdeeds being covered up. You assume that her friends and family would step forward to publicly accuse him, but the consequences to herself and even her family would be severe.  Wouldn’t it be wiser for us to hush it up and mightn’t he know that and count on our silence?”
“But to hush it up would be to put other young girls at risk,” countered Gardiner Pater.
“Oh yes,” said Elizabeth. “There is an evil to hiding his wickedness from the world. I know that well enough now!”
“What do you mean?”
“Only that it is hard to see where our duty lies. How can we sacrifice Lydia to the ill opinion of the world and probable exile from Titan? But how can we let Wickham continue to defile innocents with impunity?”
“Upon my word,” said Gardiner Mater, “That is a strong judgment.” She shook her head. “I begin to be of your uncle’s opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to believe him capable of it?”
“I have reason to believe that he is capable of such designs and that all of Titan’s young daughters could be at risk from his  depravity.”
“But it may not be so,” persisted Gardiner Mater. “They may be drawing up a breeding contract even as we speak.”
“If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare not hope it. Why have they not sent us an email to keep us informed, if that is the case?”
“They may be afraid that your father would object to the contract,” replied Gardiner Pater, “and wish to make their arrangement known only after it has been settled.”
“But why  all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their arrangements be private? They must know that our father would have no choice but to agree to a breeding contract at this point. Oh, no, no—this is not likely. His most particular friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intending to breed with her. Wickham will never breed with a woman without a powerful family or valuable connections. He cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia—what attraction has she beyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him so want her to bear his children that he would forego every chance of benefiting himself by forming a more useful partnership? Lydia doesn’t even have brothers who could help to forward his career or who could, at the very least, provide for his offspring in the event of his demise. It would be the most imprudent of breeding arrangements.”
“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him as to consent to live with him without a co-parenting contract?”
“It does seem, and it is, most shocking indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young; she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year, nay, for a tenmonth—she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the Ngala were first quartered in Mandalay, nothing but love, flirtation, and astronauts have been in her head. She has been doing everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater—what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a lass.”
“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so very ill of Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.”
“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he is depraved in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”
“And do you really know all this?” cried Gardiner Mater, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.
“I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you, the other day, of his infamous behaviour to Squire Darcy; and you yourself, when last at Liqua, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other circumstances which I am not at liberty—which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.”
“But does Lydia know nothing of this? Can she be ignorant of what you and Jane seem so well to understand?”
“Oh, yes!—that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Darwin, and saw so much both of Squire Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the Ngala was to leave Mandalay in a week or fortnight’s time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Forster Mater, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That she could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a consequence as this could ensue, you may easily believe, was far enough from my thoughts.”
“When they all removed to Orleans, therefore, you had no reason, I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”
“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first he entered the aeronautics corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every lass in or near Mandalay was out of her senses about him for the first two months; but he never distinguished her by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the corps, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.
They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and, sleeping one night on the road, reached Liqua by dinner time the next day. It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long expectations.
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a camel cart, were standing on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the cart drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the family room, where Jane, who came running down from her mother’s room, immediately met her.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives.
“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope everything will be well.”
“Is my father in town?”
“Yes, he went on Zeusday, as I wrote you word.” “And have you heard from him often?”
“We have heard only twice. He wrote me a few lines on Watersday to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write again till he had something of importance to mention.”
“And my mother—how is she? How are you all?” 
“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken. She is up stairs and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her bedroom. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven, are quite well.” 
“But you—how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much you must have gone through!” 
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while the Gardiners were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
When they were all in the family room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some email, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the settlement of a breeding contract.
Bennet Mater, to whose room they all repaired, after a few minutes’ conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must principally be owing.
“Why did the Forsters ever let her go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And now here’s Bennet Pater gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meets him and then he will be killed and what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.”
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Gardiner Pater, after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her that he meant to be in NeoLondon the very next day, and would assist Bennet Pater in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.
“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he; “though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Orleans. In a few days more we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they have not settled a contract, and have no design of breeding, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to Lizardneck Lane; and then we may consult together as to what is to be  done.”
“Oh! My dear brother,” replied Bennet Mater, “that is exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out, wherever they may be; and if they have not formed a contract already, take them to a lawyer. And as for genetic tests, do not let them wait for that. You must make Wickham agree to breed with Lydia regardless of their suitability. He has no right to back down now. And, above all, keep Bennet Pater from fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits—and have such tremblings, such flutterings, all over me—such spasms in my side and pains in my head, and such beatings at heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all.”
But Gardiner Pater, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her fear; and after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent her feelings on the pots and pans in the kitchen.
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate bedrooms to make their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the possible ramifications to her own breeding prospects, had given more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:
“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, “Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may use this circumstance to reflect on the strange logic of breeding arrangements. For even if it becomes known that Lydia has been tragically deceived and indecently used by this man, there can be no rational reason to adjudge her breeding capacities to be affected or her maternal skills to be in any way lessened. And yet, she will be judged to be a less desirable co-parent. Thus ancient superstitions cast their sordid shadow on our enlightened society.”
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.
“One might argue,” Mary continued to muse, “that Lydia’s behavior results from her flighty, thoughtless nature, and thus is indicative of a genetic flaw… But is that reasoning sound? If she had never met with such an insidious deceiver, her character flaws would never have come to light, and she would have been deemed to be ideal vessel for motherhood. Truly I cannot believe there is a defensible logic behind this customary taboo.”
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject, by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before they absconded? They must have seen them together for ever.”
“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He knew that Wickham was unlikely to propose breeding with Lydia, given the obvious impropriety of such a match, and he never suspected that he could have an lascivious interest in such a young lass.”
“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not propose a breeding contract? Did he know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”
“Yes; but, when questioned by him, Denny denied knowing anything of their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not breeding—and from that, I am inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood before.”
“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their really entering a breeding contract?”
“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a little uneasy—a little fearful of my sister’s happiness in bearing children to such a man, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their indecent flirtations with each other, for many weeks.”
“But not before they went to Orleans?”
“No, I believe not.”
“And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does he know his real character?”
“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left Mandalay greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false.”
“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not have happened!”
“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister. “But to expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions.”
“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to his co-parent?” “He brought it with him for us to see.”
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These were the contents: 
“MY DEAR HARRIET,
“You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise tomorrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to NeoLondon, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Liqua of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater, when I write to them and sign my name ‘Lydia Wickham.’ What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Santiago for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him tonight. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I shall consider being his paramour in twenty years! I shall send for my clothes when I get to Liqua; but I wish you would tell mother to mend a great slit in my embroidered muslin sari before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.
“Your affectionate friend,
“LYDIA BENNET.”
“Oh! Thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that she was serious on the subject of their journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a scheme of infamy. My poor father! How he must have felt it!”
“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!”
“Oh! Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a soul in the village who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”
“I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.”
“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been with you! You have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.”
“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Liqua on Zeusday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thorsday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very kind; she rode here on Watersday morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters’, if they should be of use to us.”
“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth; “perhaps she meant well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
“He meant I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Natalia, the place where they last changed camels, see the postilions and try if anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the number of the camel coach which took them from Silverstone. It had come with a fare from NeoLondon; and as he thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Silverstone. If he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out even so much as this.”
Jane was drained from the effort of this detailed report and her habitual optimism momentarily flagged.
“Oh Elizabeth,” Jane exclaimed in distress, “Do you really think this could be the ruin of us all? Could it really be that one naive and foolish sister who allows her sentiments to be manipulated by a depraved reprobate renders all of us unworthy of a mate? And could it be that in a few short years, we will be torn from everything we know and thrown into the wretched abyss of Ganymede? Could that be our absurd and monstrous fate?”
“I don’t know,” said Elizabeth gravely. “I don’t know.”


Chapter 48

The whole party were in hopes of an email from Bennet Pater the next day, but the morning passed without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of that they would have been glad to be certain. Gardiner Pater waited until noon before he set off.
When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Bennet Pater to return to Liqua, as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her co-parent’s not being arrested for murder.
Gardiner Mater and the children were to remain in Mexistan a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Bennet Mater, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up—though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or debauchery, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.
All Mandalay seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and every tradesman’s family had had reason to fear for their young daughters. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister’s ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come when, if they had gone to draw up a breeding contract, they must in all probability have informed the family of the news.
Gardiner Pater left Liqua on Sunday; on Zeusday his co-parent received an email from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Lizardneck Lane; that Bennet Pater had been to Natalia and Silverstone, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Bennet Pater thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to NeoLondon, before they procured lodgings. Gardiner Pater himself did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Bennet Pater seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave NeoLondon and promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:
“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the corps, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other person.”
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the Ngala Corps might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.
Every day at Liqua was now a day of anxiety. The arrival of emails was the grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through email, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.
But before they heard again from Gardiner Pater, an email arrived for their father, and copied to their mother, from a different quarter, from Collins Pater; Bennet Mater declared herself to be unfit to attend to such trifles and requested that Jane read it; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:
“MY DEAR SIR,
“I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by an email from Mexistan. Be assured, my dear sir, that Collins Mater and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune—or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Bennet Mater, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be congenitally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Collins Mater, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last Nonember; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and save your sympathy for your four innocent daughters who, most unjustly, are left to face the tragic repercussions of their sister’s heinous offence.
“I am, dear sir, etc., etc.”
Gardiner Pater did not write again till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he had been in the aeronautics corps, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations, for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Orleans. He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Gardiner Pater did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Liqua family. Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.”
“Darling Jane, is there no limit to your capacity for surprise?” Elizabeth asked in sad amusement. “An esteemed gentleman risks his good name, his career and possibly his life for some illicit thrills with our sister, and you are astounded that he also risks his money on dice!”
Gardiner Pater added in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which was Saturnsday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his Gardiner Pater’s entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When Bennet Mater was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety for his life had been before.
“What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he will not leave NeoLondon before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him establish a breeding contract, if he comes away?”
As Gardiner Mater began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and the children should go to NeoLondon, at the same time that Bennet Pater came from it. The camel cart, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Liqua.
Gardiner Mater went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her New Arabia friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Gardiner Mater had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Of course, if the present matter could not be resolved without scandal, there could be no hope of Elizabeth breeding with Darcy, but Gardiner Mater still held out hope for a more felicitous outcome.
Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two. Even the prospect of exile on Ganymede would have been a little less wretched without the consciousness of having been offered, and having turned down, a very different future.
When Bennet Pater arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it.
It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it.”
“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.
“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. It will pass away soon enough.”
“Do you suppose them to be in NeoLondon?” 
“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?” 
“And Lydia used to want to go to NeoLondon,” added Kitty.
“She is happy then,” said her father drily; “and her residence there will probably be of some duration.”
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s tea.
“This is a parade,” he cried, “which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my den, in my robe and slippers, and give as much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”
“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty fretfully. “If I should ever go to Orleans, I would behave better than Lydia.”
“You go to Orleans? I would not trust you so near it as Ishtar for fifty plats! No, Kitty, if you are to have a future, you will have to excel in respectability. No astronaut is ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.  And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.”
Kitty looked distressed.
“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. Unlike your older sisters, you have a full thirteen years to find yourself a mate. Perhaps after ten years has passed, and you have become a paragon of good sense, our disgrace will be well enough forgotten by the world as to allow some desperate youth with a bad knee and a squint to consider you to be the mother of his children.”
Kitty began to cry.



Chapter 49

Jane and Elizabeth were in the poultry house gathering eggs for breakfast when they saw their father striding across the sands towards them in an old linen thobe with his headscarf so carelessly wound that it was in danger of unravelling at every step.
“How are the ostriches laying?” he asked.
“Quite well,” answered Elizabeth, surprised at her father’s query, as he normally exhibited little interest in food production. “Six large eggs this morning. They have responded quite well to the mixture of ground cactus, lentils and soy that Mary developed for them.”
“Hm,” her father grunted, staring vacantly at the birds who, being unused to visits from the master of the house, stared vacantly back.
“I’ve received an email,” Bennett Pater said at last, pulling a letter out of the folds of his robe.
“Oh, papa, what news—what news?” cried Elizabeth. “Is it from my uncle?” “Yes.”
“Well, and what news does it bring—good or bad?” “What is there of good to be expected?” said he. “But I have printed it out for you. Perhaps you would like to read it.” He offered her the paper.
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand.
“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is about.” “Lizardneck Lane, Moonday, Octember 2.
“MY DEAR BROTHER,
“At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturnsday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of NeoLondon they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen them both—”
“Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane; “they are establishing a contract.” Elizabeth read on:
“I have seen them both. They have not seen a lawyer, nor can I find there was any intention of doing so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they have a contract drawn up. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter’s co-parent, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand platinums secured among your children’s breeding partners, if any, after your decease; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing him, during your life, one hundred platinums per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I am sending this email immediately, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Squire Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to provide for your grandchildren, in addition to your contribution. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Muhammad for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at Liqua, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that the contract be settled here in NeoLondon of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us today. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,
“EDW. GARDINER.”
“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be possible that he will agree to accept her as the mother of his children?”
“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,” said her sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”
“And have you answered the email?” cried Elizabeth.
“No; but it must be done soon.”
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote.
“Oh! My dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”
“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble yourself.” 
“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.” And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.
“And may I ask—” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with.”
 “Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.” 
“And they must breed! Yet he is such a man!” “Yes, yes, they must breed. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever to pay him.” 
“Money! My uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?” 
“I mean, that no man in his senses would breed with Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am gone.” 
“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh! It must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.” 
“No,” said her father; “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a copper less than ten thousand plats. I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.” 
“Ten thousand plats! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?” 
Bennet Pater made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to his den to write, and the girls walked into the kitchen.
“And they are really to be become co-parents!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. “How strange this is! And for this we are to be thankful. That they should have children together, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Lydia!”
“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would not agree to breed with Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand plats, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand plats?”
“If he were ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Gardiner Pater has done for them, because Wickham has not silver of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!”
“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said Jane: “I hope and trust that the children that result from this arrangement will not take after their father. We can anticipate that such a close brush with catastrophe will make Lydia a conscientious and cautious mother, while Wickham is likely to be so negligent a father that his influence can be minimized. I flatter myself the matter will settle so quietly, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten.”
“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “that the world can ever forget.” 
“But the worst is averted, you must confess,” persisted Jane.
“Yes,” said Elizabeth, allowing herself to acknowledge a great sense of relief. “The scandal is mostly averted and our family need not be forever deemed unworthy of producing heirs.”
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They arrived back to the house with their father and asked him whether he would not wish them to make it known to her. He coolly replied:
“Just as you please.”
Elizabeth took the letter from her father, and they went up stairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Bennet Mater: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Bennet Mater could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Gardiner Pater’s hope of Lydia’s being soon contracted to Wickham, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be breeding was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.
“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried. “This is delightful indeed! She will be bred! I shall see her again! She will be bred at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage everything! How I long to see her! And to see dear Wickham too! But the layette, the baby clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Gardiner Pater’s behavior laid them all under.
“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Squire Wickham with money.”
“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If  it weren’t for the sexist laws of this Colony, I and my children should have inherited half the money from my father; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have grandchildren! How glorious! And she was only sixteen last Sextober. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of swaddling clothes, teething rings and baby carriers, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.
“I will go to Mandalay,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Llewellyn Mater. Kitty, run down and harness up the llamas. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Mandalay? Oh! I can’t wait to spread that news. I shall tell everyone I meet that Miss Lydia is going to be breed with Wickham; and we’ll have a grand party to make merry when her first baby is on the way.”
Elizabeth, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.
Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to the fate that had seemed all but inevitable for her four sisters and herself, only two hours ago, she was deeply thankful for the advantages of what they had gained.


Chapter 50

Bennet Pater had very often wished before this period of his life that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his co-parent, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most wicked young men in Titan to breed with her might then have rested in its proper place.
He was seriously concerned that the rescue of his entire family from shame should be forwarded at the sole expense of his co-parent’s brother, and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
When first Bennet Pater had begun a family with Bennet Mater, economy was held to be perfectly useless. Of course, they knew they were never to have a son, but they were confident of having healthy daughters who would have no difficulty in landing advantageous breeding contracts. Five daughters successively entered the world, and each was more beautiful than the last. Even Mary was a delightful baby. By the time he realized that his younger daughters had only good health to recommend them (and Kitty’s cough was a concern even on that score), he had such faith in his two older children as to alleviate all of his concern. He could not doubt that they would find influential men to breed with and thus save the family from ruin. It never occurred to him that one of his less worthy daughters would bring a scandal to the family that would put all of them in jeopardy.  The threat of absolute ruin was now averted, but a debt of honour now took its place.
Due to a combination of his lack of professional ambition and his economic ineptitude, Bennet Pater had saved only five thousand platinums over the previous twenty-seven years.  This sum would have to somehow suffice for the dowrys of his five daughters. This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Bennet Pater could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered in an email his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to breed with his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten plats a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within that sum.
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His email was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his co-parent’s brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. It was soon acknowledged by formerly suspicious townspeople that Wickham’s apparent interest in young girls was motivated only by his search for a youthful breeding partner.
It was a fortnight since Bennet Mater had been outside of her bedroom or the kitchen; but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph. A breeding contract for her daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was fifteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on the matters attendant on setting up a household for her daughter and her grandchildren. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for them, and, without knowing or considering what Wickham’s income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance.
“Ziva Park might do,” said she, “if the Lams could quit it—or the great house at Swarna, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashanti is too far off! I could not bear to have her fifty miles from me; and as for Galen Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”
Her co-parent interrupted her: “Bennet Mater, before you take any or all of these houses for Wickham and your daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into one house in this neighborhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receiving them at Liqua.”
A long dispute followed this declaration; but Bennet Pater was firm. It soon led to another; and Bennet Mater found, with amazement and horror, that her co-parent would not advance a silver to buy baby things for his daughter’s first born. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion. Bennet Mater could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse to help his daughter with the necessities of caring for a newborn exceeded all that she could possibly believe. She was more alive to the disgrace which the want of suitable clothes must reflect on her daughter’s offspring, than to any sense of shame at her absconding and living with Wickham a fortnight before a contract was arranged.
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make Squire Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since the conclusion of a breeding contract would so shortly give the proper termination to the escapade, they might hope to conceal its unfavorable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s frailty would have mortified her so much—not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia’s contract been concluded on the most honorable terms, it was not to be supposed that Squire Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly abhorred.
From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in New Arabia, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She forgave him for his confusion between romantic love and paramour love, and even become convinced that, if he had been able to transform his ardour into respectable affection and regard, they could have happily raised a family together.
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the offer which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now have given her such sincere gratification as to tempt her to overlook its scandalous nature!
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would have been the perfect co-parent for her if he had not complicated the possibility of their breeding with his unruly emotions. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance. The children of such a union would have inherited the best of both sets of genes and been raised in an environment respectively enriched by their complementary characters.
But no such happy arrangement could now teach the admiring multitude what good breeding really was. A union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family.
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were coerced into a breeding arrangement only to avoid scandal, she could easily conjecture.
Gardiner Pater soon wrote again to his sister’s co-parent. To Bennet Pater’s acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was to inform them that Squire Wickham had resolved on quitting the Ngala Corps and requesting a transfer to the eastern frontier colony of Juno.
“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as their contract was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece’s. It is Squire Wickham’s intention to apply to the Lakota Corps; they recently suffered a devastating accident that resulted in the deaths of 25 astronauts, including several officers. They are desperate for a few brave recruits, and, whatever his faults, Wickham has never lacked for courage. It is an advantage to have them settle so far from Mexistan. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Squire Wickham in and near Orleans, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Mandalay of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Mohammad has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his new prospecting corps, unless they are first invited to Liqua; and I understand from Gardiner Mater, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the East. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.—Yours, etc.,
“E. GARDINER.”
Bennet Pater and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s removal from the Ngala as clearly as Gardiner Pater could do. But Bennet Mater was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in the East, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Mexistan, was a severe disappointment. She was also concerned about Wickham’s joining such a dangerous mission. “What if he is killed like those other astronauts?” she protested. “Who would provide for Lydia and her babies then?”
Bennet Pater admitted the danger but merely said that she would have to bear the risk. “She’s been remarkably fortunately so far in avoiding the consequences of her recklessness. Perhaps her luck will hold out,” he said dryly.
Bennet Mater wept and called him a hard man, but Bennet Pater refused to be drawn into speculations regarding a hypothetical tragedy.
His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again before she set off for the East, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed before her departure by her parents, urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and Wickham at Liqua, as soon as their contract was settled, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show off her daughter and her new breeding partner in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the East. When Bennet Pater wrote again to Gardiner Pater, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was determined, that as soon as the contract was settled, they should proceed to Liqua. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.

Chapter 51

At last word arrived from Gardiner Mater that the contract between Lydia and Wickham had been finalized. A camel cart was sent to meet them at Freyr, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure.
They came. The family were assembled in the family room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of Bennet Mater as the cart drove up to the door; her co-parent looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
Lydia’s voice was heard on the doorstep; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed his new breeding partner; and wished them both joy in anticipation of their fruitfulness.
Their reception from Bennet Pater, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so pleasing, that had his character and history been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the artistry of unregenerate evil. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.
There was no want of discourse. Lydia and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighborhood, with a good humored ease which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.
“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! When I went away, I am sure I had no idea that I would have a breeding partner by the time I had came back again! Though I thought it would be very good fun if I could.”
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, “Oh! Mamma, do the people hereabouts know I already have a breeding partner? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook Waldo Lam in his carriage, so I was determined he should know it, and so I leaned over the side of our cart, and shouted to him, ‘Wickham is going to knock me up!’”
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining-room. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, “Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a woman with a co-parenting contract.”
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Phillips Mater, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Wickham Mater” by each of them.
“Well, mamma,” said she, “and what do you think of my co-parent? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Orleans. That is the place to get breeding partners. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.”
“Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don’t at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”
“Oh, lord! Yes;—there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Fecundia all the dusty season, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will take care to get good dancing partners for them all, and a paramour for you!”
“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get breeding partners for them before the dusty season is over.”
“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not particularly like your way of getting breeding partners.”
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Wickham Pater had received his new assignment before he left NeoLondon, and he was to join his new prospecting corps at the end of a fortnight.
No one but Bennet Mater regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.
Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. Her childishness did evidently please him still, but his eye was apt to wander whenever there were even younger lasses in attendance. A few years and a couple of babies later, and Elizabeth had no doubt Wickham would lose interest in her completely. That he would not remain romantically interested in his co-parent was, of course, as it should be, but the possibility of him being attracted to other young lasses, and not having the moral strength to ignore his attraction, worried Elizabeth. For the sake of other young lasses with whom he was likely to become acquainted, she fervently hoped that fatherhood would mature him.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more lizards at the start of the hunting season, than any body else in the Colony.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:
“Lizzy, I never gave you an account how our contract was settled, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?”
“Not really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little said on the subject.” 
“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We all met with Gardiner Pater’s lawyer, Mohammad, on Moonday to order him to draw up the contract and he told us that Wickham and I had to undergo genetic screening! Well, Wickham told him that he was willing to waive that requirement in order to expedite the contract. Wickham was so convinced of my flawless genetic profile, you see, that he didn’t even need to confirm it! But the lawyer, dreadful man!, said we could not be legally united without a genetic screening! Well, I was so worried! Wickham may have been confident of my perfection, but how could I be sure! Just imagine if the geneticist had said that we were incompatible! Horrors! We would be tragically parted and never been allowed to raise a family together! But fortunately, everything was fine. The geneticist said we were a perfect match! So, finally, we were cleared to settle the contract at the lawyer’s on Zeusday. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together. Well, Zeusday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would wear his maroon thobe.” “Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you’ll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure NeoLondon was rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the llama cart came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Garibaldi Pater. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to be a witness; and if we were beyond the hour, we would not be able to settle the contract that day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented from going, the contract settlement need not be put off, for Squire Darcy might have done as well.” 
“Squire Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.
“Oh, yes!—he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”
“If it was to be secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”
“Oh! Certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we will ask you no questions.”
“Thank you,” said Lydia, “for if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry.”
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away.
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information. Squire Darcy had been at Gardiner Pater’s lawyer’s office when Lydia’s contract was settled! It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such suspense; and running to the computer, wrote a short email to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it—unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavor to be satisfied with ignorance.”
“Not that I shall, though,” she added to herself, as she finished the letter; “and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out.”
Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;—till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.

Chapter 52

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her email as soon as she possibly could. She had no sooner received it than she printed it out and hurried off with it to the little grotto, where she was least likely to be interrupted. She sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial.
“Lizardneck Lane, Octember 6.
“MY DEAR NIECE,
“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your application; I did not expect it from you. Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am—and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.
“On the very day of my coming home from Liqua, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Squire Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been. He came to tell Gardiner Pater that he had found out where your sister and  Squire Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left New Arabia only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham’s wickedness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young lass to trust him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to expose to the scrutiny of the world unsavorable affairs connected with his own family. He had put too much value on the dignity of the family name and too little on public justice. He called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavor to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he had another motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than we had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.
“There is a lady, it seems, a  Sima Mater, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large house in Ginza Street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Sima Mater was, he knew, a sometime paramour of Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted. She would not betray her lover, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did know where he was to be found. Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in NeoLondon, and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in Coppervein street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go, to hush up the affair. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should settle a breeding contract some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a contract, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never been his design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the aeronautics corps, on account of some debts which were very pressing; and in his distress chose to comfort himself in his flight from the demands of honour with the balm of Lydia’s innocent love. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.
“Squire Darcy asked him why he had not formed a contract with your sister at once. Though Bennet Pater was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by breeding with a lass from an influential family. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
“They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable.
“Every thing being settled between them, Squire Darcy’s next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Lizardneck Lane the evening before I came home. But Gardiner Pater could not be seen, and Squire Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.
“On Saturnsday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
“They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Moonday: as soon as it was, the news was sent off to Liqua. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times, but this is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
“They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lass concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most.
“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand platinums, another thousand in addition to her own settled upon her, and his transfer arranged. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in this; though I doubt whether his reserve, or anybody’s reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair.
“When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in NeoLondon once more when the contract was signed, and all money matters were then to receive the last finish.
“I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house. He was exactly what he had been, when I knew him in Mexistan; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with her behaviour while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter last Watersday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her all the recklessness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness and danger she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.
“Squire Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, came to the lawyer’s office to observe the finalization of the contract. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on Watersday or Thorsday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him. His behavior to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in New Arabia. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and that undoubtedly will improve when he has settled on a breeding partner and can devote himself to the pleasures of a paramour or two. I am convinced that he means to have you as the mother of his children, but he was circumspect and said nothing on the subject.
“Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park and tried a least half of dozen different programs in the holodeck.
“But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour.
“Yours, very sincerely,
“M. GARDINER.”
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Squire Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a lass whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it out of pity, that he was justly outraged by the fact that a family of daughters could all be deemed unfit to breed and doomed to probable exile by the recklessness and criminal naivity of a child of sixteen. Could he be so just, so kind, so rightly moved to pity? It moved her to admiration and made her realization of her personal loss all the more bitter. For there could be no more hope of him still seeking her services as a breeding partner, when such an arrangement must connect him with the man he most abhorred. Every kind of pride must revolt from any connection with Wickham. Squire Darcy had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. She could, perhaps, believe that it was his partiality for her might that roused his pity into action in a way that a recognition of injustice visited upon strangers could not have done. For that there was injustice, Elizabeth had no doubt. But the injustice was not the fault of Darcy, and it was not his obligation to right it. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia’s character and the character of the entire family to him. He had saved them all from the abyss. Oh! How heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause of compassion and honor, he had been able to get the better of himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that respect and mutual approbation subsisted between Squire Darcy and herself.
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one’s approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham.
“I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear Eliza?” said he, as he joined her.
“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.” Elizabeth’s instinctive politeness conquered her revulsion for this unctuous rogue.
“I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and now we are better.”
“Indeed, we understand each other better now. Are the others coming out?” 
“I do not know. Bennet Mater and Lydia are going in the llama cart to Mandalay. And so, my dear Eliza, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley.” She replied in the affirmative.
“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Fecundia. And you saw the old grandmother, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”
“Yes, she did.”
“And what did she say?”
“That you were gone into the Space Agency, and she was afraid had—not turned out well. At such a distance as that, you know, things are strangely misrepresented.”
“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:
“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”
“Perhaps discussing breeding arrangements with Miss de Bourgh,” said Elizabeth. “It must be something particular, to take him there at this time of year.”
“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Alpaca? I thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had.”
“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”
“And do you like her?”
“Very much.”
“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two, quite filled out, with a nubile, motherly figure. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. She was just a skinny, gawky thing. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will find a suitable breeding partner.”
“I dare say she will; she has got over the most awkward age and now exudes fecundity.” “Did you go by the village of Kryton?”
“I do not recollect that we did.”
“I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place!—Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited me in every respect.”
“How should you have liked making sermons?” 
“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. I would have especially devoted myself to the guidance and comfort of the children of the parish. One ought not to repine;—but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Darwin?” 
“I have heard from authority, which I thought as good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.” 
“You have. Yes, there was something in that; I told you so from the first, you may remember.” 
“I did hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly.” 
“You did! And it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.” 
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with an insincere smile: “Come, Wickham Pater, we are connected now, you know – your children will be my nieces and nephews. Do not let us quarrel about the past, and let us hope that we will have no grounds for conflict in the future.” 
He proffered his hand, but she could not bring herself to take it, due to an irrational but irresistible conviction that the depravity in his soul was a contagion that could be transmitted through touch.


Chapter 53

Wickham Pater was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his breeding partner’s sister, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet.
The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came, and Bennet Mater was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her co-parent by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to Fecundia, was likely to continue at least a tenmonth.
“Oh! My dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?” 
“Oh, lord! I don’t know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.” 
“Write to me very often, my dear.”
“As often as I can. But you know breeding women have never much time for writing. My sisters may write to me. They will have nothing else to do.”
Wickham Pater’s adieus were much more affectionate than his Lydia’s. He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
“He is as fine a fellow,” said Bennet Pater, as soon as they were out of the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Senator Lucas himself to produce a father for his grandchildren that has a more respectable appearance.” Then in a slightly lower voice, he added, “Let’s hope that our family’s genes prevail over his in the governing of internal characteristics.”
The loss of her daughter made Bennet Mater very dull for several days.
“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with one’s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”
“This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of having a daughter with a breeding contract,” said Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are still at liberty.”
“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she has a contract, but only because her breeding partner’s corps happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The manager at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of his employer, who was coming down in a day or two. Bennet Mater was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled and shook her head by turns.
“Well, well, and so Squire Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Phillips Mater first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what may happen? But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?”
“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Singh Mater was in Mandalay last night; I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He comes down on Thorsday at the latest, very likely on Watersday. She was preparing a special dish of cacti, camel milk and lizard meat, since her co-parent shot three plump specimens on Zeusday.”
Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:
“I saw you look at me today, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I appeared distressed. But don’t imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that I should be looked at. I am afraid that people will suspect me of a broken heart and consider me a poor breeding prospect. However, I do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of myself, but I dread other people’s mistaken conclusions.”
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in New Arabia, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there with his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come without it.
“Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot come to his own mining enterprise, without raising all this speculation! I will leave him to himself.”
In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a tenmonth ago, was now brought forward again.
“As soon as ever Squire Bingley comes, my dear,” said Bennet Mater, “you will wait on him of course.”
“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should breed with one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”
His co-parent represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring families with daughters, on his returning to Netherfield. “If you do not treat him with the expected etiquette, people will suspect that he has broken Jane’s heart. You cannot allow such a dangerous speculation to arise!”
“They will not make such a conclusion. They will simply conclude that I do not care for parading my daughters to potential mates at every opportunity,” said he. “If he wants our society, let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend my hours in running after eligible young men every time they go away and come back again.”
“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Llewellyn Mater and the Lams soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him.”
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her co-parent’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see Squire Bingley, in consequence of it, before they did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--
“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!”
“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth; “but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have always so much.”
Squire Bingley arrived. Bennet Mater, through the assistance of gossips, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent; hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in Mexistan, she saw him, from her bedroom window, enter the paddock and ride towards the house.
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window--she looked,--she saw Squire Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister.
“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it be?” 
“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not know.” 
“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with him before. Squire what’s-his-name. That tall, proud man.” 
“Good gracious! Squire Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Squire Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.” 
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little of their meeting in New Arabia, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on, of her dislike of Squire Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as Squire Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Gardiner Mater’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man who had confessed to a scandalous passion for Elizabeth, but who had otherwise had virtues that had been widely undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for still having a future on Titan. Moreover, even beyond the obligations of gratitude, Elizabeth had now developed a respect for him, if not quite so ingenuous, at least as reasonable as what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his coming to Netherfield, to Liqua, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in New Arabia.
The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his passion was perhaps unshaken. Of course, such a passion still made the prospect of a breeding contract quite impossible, but Elizabeth could not deny that it was a thrill, albeit an illicit, disreputable thrill, to think that he might still have feelings for her.
“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “Then I will know if he is still strugging with indecorous emotions.”
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as her mother was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance.
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in Mexistan, than as she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Bennet Mater with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend.
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the salvation on Titan of her favorite daughter, and the hopes for salvation of the other four, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied.
Darcy, after inquiring of her how the Gardiners were, a question which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything. He was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in New Arabia. There he had talked to her friends, when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. Perhaps his passion had run its course. She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.
“It is better this way,” said she. “I should rejoice that he has mastered his ill-conceived desire.” She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to him she had hardly courage to speak.
She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.
“It is a long time, Squire Bingley, since you went away,” said Bennet Mater.
He readily agreed to it.
“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People did say you meant to quit your appointment entirely before the Bacchanalia; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is contracted and settled. And one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in The Titan Gazette and The Mexistan Tidings, I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately, George Wickham contracted to breed with Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything. It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How Squire Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell.
“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well settled,” continued her mother, “but at the same time, Squire Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to Fecundia, a place quite eastward, it seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how long. His corps is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving the Ngala, and of his being gone to the frontier. Thank Heaven! He has some friends, though perhaps not so many as he deserves.”
Elizabeth, who knew this to be leveled at Squire Darcy, was in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in their colony at present. A few weeks, he believed.
“When you have killed all your own lizards, Squire Bingley,” said her mother, “I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Bennet Pater’s land. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you.”
Elizabeth’s misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion.
“The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one or the other again!”
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing how much the nubility of her sister re-kindled the admiration of the man who had once appraised her so highly as a breeding prospect. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little; but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her as healthy as she had been last year; as promising of fecundity, and as good natured, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever. But her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent.
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Bennet Mater was mindful of her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at Liqua in a few days time.
“You are quite a visit in my debt, Squire Bingley,” she added, “for when you went to town last dusty season, you promised to take a family dinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement.”
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.
Bennet Mater had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but she did not think their intended dinner of herbs and ostrich egg could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year.


Chapter 54

As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Squire Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed her.
“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she, “did he come at all?” She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
“He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me? If he is still struggling to overcome his inappropriate feelings for me, why come hither? If the corrosive passion has been excised, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more about him.”
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.
“Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Zeusday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.”
“Yes, very indifferent indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh, Jane, take care.” 
“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?” 
“I do not think you are in danger of damaging your reputation. You are playing your part well. But I think you may be in danger of being hurt again. If you must love, love cautiously.”

They did not see the gentlemen again till Zeusday; and Bennet Mater, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit, had revived.
On Zeusday there was a large party assembled at Liqua; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as professional men, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her.
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Squire Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.
His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Squire Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind; and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the family room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
“If he does not come to me, then,” said she, “I shall believe him recovered from his infatuation. And I shall rejoice, for his sake,” she told herself firmly, though she knew in her heart that she would also grieve for the loss of something that should never have been allowed to exist.
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her tremulous expectation; but, alas! The ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:
“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?” Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for being so silly! “A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to be concerrned about a renewal of his offer? If he is no longer suffering from the wholly inappropriate feelings that had compelled him to propose a breeding contract with me, there is no reason for him to consider me as a co-parent. Even if he has learned that there is no reason that I would not be able to give him a son, all the other objections to my family’s imperfect genes and poverty of connections remain. And if, on the other hand, he is still in the grip of a romantic obsession, I cannot but refuse him again. There is no more perilous basis for a breeding arrangement than love!” And yet, though she knew nothing worthwhile could come of it, Elizabeth could not prevent herself from hoping that Darcy would speak to her.
Her spirits lifted when she saw him bringing back his coffee cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:
“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”
“Yes, she will remain there till the Bacchanalia.” 
“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?” 
“Mizuno Mater is with her. The others have been gone on to Dharma, these three weeks.” 
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.
When the tea-things were removed, and the mahjong-tables placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her mother’s rapacity for a fourth for her table. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself. No, she told herself sternly, if he can’t take his eyes off of me, then his emotional state is not conducive for his own happiness and cannot contribute to any future between us. But she nevertheless longed for an indication that she was in his thoughts.
Bennet Mater had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but they had business to attend to and could not be detained.
“Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The llama calf was roasted to a turn—and everybody said they never saw so fat a haunch. The ostrich egg curry was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases’ last week; and even Squire Darcy acknowledged, that the lizards were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has the most sophisticated robotic cook. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look more fertile. Llewellyn Mater said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Bennet Mater, we shall have her at Netherfield at last.’ She did indeed. I do think Llewellyn Mater is as good a creature as ever lived—and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and rather lacking in secondary sexual characteristics: I like them prodigiously.”
Bennet Mater, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get a contract with him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make an offer.
“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again.”
Elizabeth smiled.
“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of breeding with me. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.”
“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.”
“How hard it is in some cases to be believed!” 
“And how impossible in others!”
“But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?”
 Elizabeth’s smile faded and she said with gentle seriousness, “I only hope that you will recognize the danger your heart is in. Enjoy Bingley’s agreeable manners, by all means, but temper your hopes. If he does not offer you a breeding contract, I hope you will not let it afflict you. You need to retain that natural good health and liveliness of spirits, so that another man may come to see you as a prospective mother to his children.” 
“But another man will not be Bingley,” objected her sister.
“But another man will keep you here on Titan,” said Elizabeth, “And when the time for paramours comes … Bingley will be waiting!”


Chapter 55

The next day, Elizabeth received an email informing her that the Gardiners were visiting the Philipses the following morning. She was delighted to hear this, as her mind had been heavily burdened by misgivings regarding the possible future activities of her sister’s new breeding partner and she felt that only a conference with the Gardiners could hope to relieve her feelings.
The next morning, she rose early, saddled her favorite llama, a light-footed pinto called Jacqui, and rode out to have a private discussion with her aunt and uncle.
In order to ensure discretion, she invited the Gardiners to take a stroll with her on the Philips’s grounds.

“Well, Lizzy,” Gardiner Mater said with a smile. “What is it that has roused you out of bed with such urgency this morning?”

Elizabeth was unsure how to start, but having come so far, decided that it would be foolish to waste time on pleasantries.

“First of all, I want to express my deepest gratitude for all you have done. You and, of course, Squire Darcy, have not only saved Lydia, but saved all of us from an unthinkable fate,” said Elizabeth.

“You know that we were more than happy to do so, Lizzy,” said Gardiner Mater. “You need not thank us for doing what was in our interests as much as yours.” She smiled. “We could not bear to lose you!”

“Thank you. I deeply appreciate the futures that have been preserved for us,” she continued. She took a deep breath. “But I worry that we have purchased our chances of a future on Titan at too great a cost.” She sighed. “Not to Lydia – she has come out of this much better than she deserves. But I am worried, haunted, by the possible consequences of continuing to cover up Wickham’s predilictions.”

Elizabeth paused, struggling to admit to a foreboding that she was reluctant to express and yet knew that she could not leave unexpressed.

“I am afraid that he could lead other young girls to ruin,” she said, at last. “Girls for whom no mechanism could be fabricated to save their reputations.”

Gardiner Pater looked at her with admiration and approval. “This concern of yours is evidence of a very fine moral sense,” he said. “And it is a very real concern. Fortunately I have it within my powers to relieve your mind entirely on this subject.”

“You have?” said Elizabeth with surprise.

“Squire Darcy and I had similar fears,” Gardiner Pater explained. “We both agreed that we could not be responsible for allowing Wickham to remain at liberty if that would give him the opportunity to repeat his offence with another innocent child.  After some consideration, we decided to use Darcy’s influence to arranged a private hearing with a judge, and in this way had Wickham convicted of deviancy with a minor. He was only able to preserve his freedom by agreeing to submit to a treatment that would eliminate all of his carnal desires.”

Elizabeth was shocked. “Are you referring,” she said in a low voice, “to chemical castration?”

“Chemical castration is not reliable enough,” said Gardiner Pater. “I am referring to castration.”

“Oh,” Elizabeth said in a small voice.

“The procedure will be carried out in Fecundia after his removal there. But first, a quantity of his sperm will be preserved so that he and Lydia can fulfill their duty to have a full cohort of children.”

She took a few minutes to process this new information and finally said, “Poor Lydia.” She reflected that, whereas Charlotte would no doubt have been grateful to be relieved of the duty of conceiving children the natural way, Lydia was unlikely to feel the same way.

Gardiner Pater smiled gently. “Lydia is scarcely more than a child,” he said. “She is too young for the kind of delights that Wickham has introduced her to. But she will soon be too fully occupied in raising a family to miss the pleasures of the flesh. And it is perhaps fortunate for Lydia that she is so young. She will only be in her thirties when her children are old enough to free her for other pursuits. At that time she will find ample opportunity for sampling the pleasures on offer in a frontier populated primarily by men.”

Elizabeth said nothing. She thought that perhaps Gardiner Pater had forgotten that he was talking to an innocent lass and not a mature woman, and she tried to disguise her embarrassment.

Finally she said, “Thank you for putting my mind at ease. Indeed, I no longer need to fear for the daughters of Fecundia.” She smiled, and recovered her countenance sufficiently to look Gardiner Pater in the eye.  “I truly cannot thank you enough. You and Squire Darcy have arranged everything beautifully.”

“But castration!” Gardiner Mater suddenly interjected, having mulled the thought over in her mind these last few minutes. “That is such a medieval solution! Do  you not feel some pity for a man whose indecent proclivities were not of his own choosing?”

Elizabeth felt her anger toward Wickham surge again in her breast. “It is not his proclivities that make him wicked,” she said warmly. “but the fact that he chose to indulge those proclivities at the cost of a young girl’s future. That is what makes him worthy of contempt! and punishment!”

Elizabeth’s indignation was just and Gardiner Mater felt her momentary pity for Wickham wane.

“Moreover,” Elizabeth continued, “There is every reason to believe that Lydia was not his first victim. I am greatly relieved to be assured that she will be his last.”

They walked around a small cluster of palm trees that marked the edge of Philips Pater’s grounds and turned back to the house, whereupon Gardiner Pater reflected, “How perplexing it is that Squire Darcy should want to keep you in the dark on his involvement in this matter.” The three friends continued in silence for a moment, contemplating this peculiarity.

“Though it would be remarkable for Squire Darcy to undergo all this trouble just to impress a potential breeding partner,” continued Gardiner Pater thoughtfully, “it is not inconceivable. I can understand that a man as proud as Darcy feels that he must have the very best for his children. Having once convinced himself that you were the very best possible mother, it would not be out of character for him to put a considerable amount of effort into securing his prize.

“But,” he  continued, with an air of perplexity, “To do all that he has done and then to try to prevent you from learning about it… I cannot make any sense of it.”
 
“You flatter me, uncle,” said Elizabeth, “Is it not simpler to conjecture that he really was motivated only by his own exacting conscience. Distressed with the guilt of having obscured Wickham’s true nature from the world, he felt an obligation to put things right. And  this he has done, handsomely.” She paused. “There is no reason to think that his actions have anything to do with me.”

Elizabeth felt the force of her own words; it was surely more plausible that Darcy was uncommonly scrupulous than that he would take such extraordinary pains on behalf of a lass of middling genetic endowment and indifferent accomplishments.

“You may be right,” said Gardiner Mater, looking at her niece thoughtfully. “But then again, Lizzy, you may be wrong.”



A few days after this visit, Squire Bingley called again to Liqua, and alone. His friend had left him that morning for NeoLondon, but was to return home in ten days’ times. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits. Bennet Mater invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concerns, he confessed that he had business at the mine to attend to.
“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.” He should be particularly happy at any time, &c. &c.; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.
“Can you come tomorrow?”
Yes, he had no engagement at all for tomorrow; and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Bennet Mater to her daughters’ room, in her camelhair robe and tasselled slippers, crying out,
“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come – Squire Bingley is come. – He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste.”
“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago.”
“Oh! Hang Kitty! What has she to do with it? Come, be quick, be quick! Where is your sash, my dear?”
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening. After tea, Bennet Pater retired to his den, as was his custom, and Mary went upstairs to her lute. Two obstacles of the five being thus removed, Bennet Mater sat looking and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter mamma? Why do you keep winking? Is the dust getting in your eye?”
“It’s nothing, child, nothing. The dust never bothers me.” She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, “Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that she would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Bennet Mater half-opened the door and called out,
“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”
Elizabeth was forced to go.
“We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother, as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in my bedroom.”
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the family room.
Bennet Mater’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every thing that was charming, except the purveyor of a breeding contract. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay to supper; and before he went away, an engagement was formed,  chiefly through his own and Bennet Mater’s means, for his coming next morning to shoot lizards with Bennet Pater.
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded. Surely, Bingley’s renewed attentions meant that he had learned that the most serious objection proposed to his breeding with Jane, that Jane might not be able to give him a son, was baseless, and that he had been given permission by Darcy, to use his own judgement in deeming Jane a worthy mother to his children.
Bingley was punctual in his appointment; and he and Bennet Pater spent the morning together productively, bagging enough lizards for a feast. Bennet Pater was much more agreeable than his companion expected. With the repercussions of Lydia’s folly so nearly bringing disaster to his entire family, Bennet Pater had repented of his carefree and satirical attitude towards breeding arrangements. He now took seriously his duty to facilitate opportunities for his daughters to breed, and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than Bingley had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Bennet Mater’s invention was again at work to get everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the kitchen for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to play monopoly, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.
But on returning to the family room, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough, but hers she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other, had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.
“Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh! Why is not everybody as happy?’
Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said for the present.
“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! To secure my own future on Titan, to be able to help my sisters find breeding contracts … these are but the smallest part of my joy! For the greatest part is knowing that I will be able to breed with such a man, and to have such children! How shall I bear so much happiness!”
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the monopoly game, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which the agreement was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.
“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious circumspection! Of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! The happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her father had been short and to the purpose.
He then came up to her and said, “Now, dearest Elizabeth, you must wish us well in our design to furnish you with a passel of nieces and nephews!”
“Indeed I do!” replied Elizabeth. “The two of you will make excellent parents, and your offspring are guaranteed to be intelligent, healthy and good-natured. I can think of no two people with a better chance at genetic compatibility!”
“She is the most motherly of creatures!” Bingley said effusively. “Nubile, graceful, kind, intelligent and empathetic. No child could hope for a better caregiver. Whatever nature begins with promise, her nurture will bring to perfection!”
Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding and the super-excellent disposition of Jane, and the intelligence, health and good looks of both that spoke of immaculate genetics.
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennett’s mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Bennet Mater could not give stop talking about what beautiful babies the two of them would make and how affectionate a grandmother she herself would be; and when Bennet Pater joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was.
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter, and said,
“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman, and your children will have a father who is both kind and influential.”
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.
“You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of the two of you breeding successfully and co-parenting cooperatively. The only danger I can foresee in raising children with a man of such easy temperament is that he will spoil the children and exceed his income in  his indulgence of them.”
“Exceed his income! My dear Bennet Pater,” cried his co-parent, “what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh! My dear, dear Jane. I am so happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must  be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so nubile for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came to Mexistan last year, I thought how likely it was that you two should breed. Oh! He is the most genetically well-endowed young man that ever was seen!”
“And financially well-endowed too,” added her father, approvingly.
Wickham, Lydia were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her mother’s favorite child. And her happiness was not limited to her gratification that Jane’s future was secured; it was augmented by the anticipation that Jane’s future connections would enable her three remaining daughters to find their own preservatives from the horror of exile.
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Liqua; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining until after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself obliged to accept. Of course, the neighbours were informed that Bingley had offered a contract to Jane, but they would not entirely abandon hope for their own daughters until a genetic counselor had cleared Bingley and Jane for breeding.
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister, but plenty of time to observe the two prospective parents together. She knew that Jane was blissfully in love with Bingley, which was right and proper, but she could also see that Bingley admired Jane immensely. Was this admiration similar to love? She thought of Darcy’s claim that no man would enter into a breeding contract with a lass that he was not attracted to. Was it true, she wondered? Bingley certainly thought very highly of Jane, enjoyed quietly gazing at her, and treated her with eager solicitation. How, Elizabeth wondered, was this different than the “love” Darcy claimed to feel for her?
Certainly, there is a difference, she told herself. Affectation, solicitude, and even attraction, were positive emotions that would bode well for the intricate cooperation that raising children together entailed. But love, especially the passionate kind of love expressed by Darcy, was a destabilizing factor in a relationship. Love invited jealousy, suspicion and even hate into the family, and passion produced turbulence.
Elizabeth wondered once again if passion could be cooled and tempered into regard, respect and rational affection. But no, she thought, passion probably just burns itself out, leaving a black hole of indifference.
Her thoughts were interrupted one evening by Jane when Bingley was occupied with business. “He has made me so happy,” she said, “by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town during the last clear season. I had not believed it possible.”
“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account for it?” 
“It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, what robust babies I give to their brother, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we can never be what we once were to each other.” 
“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.” 
“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last Nonember, he had already decided that I would be the  mother of his children. That is, until he became concerned that I would not be able to bear sons. When it occurred to him that a family with five daughters must have a genetic deficiency, he quite naturally changed his plan.” Jane sighed. “How fortunate that my father was able to let the truth be known before Bingley had made an offer to another lass!” 
“Indeed!” said Elizabeth.
“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried Jane. “Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled out from my family, and blessed above them all! If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such another man for you!”
“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Reverend Collins in time.”
When genetic counseling proclaimed Jane and Bingley to be compatible, the other families of Mandalay relinquished all hope of their daughters breeding with Bingley, and the Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away, they had generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.


Chapter 56

One morning, about a week after Bingley’s arrangement with Jane had been formed, Bennet Mater, Elizabeth and Kitty were sitting together in the drawing-room when their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the hum of a ferflivver; and they perceived an unusual ferflivver descending into the landing pad a short walk from the house. The ferflivver was a sporty and elegant model that they had never seen before and was a deep ruby red in color. It answered to none of their relative’s vehicles, nor to that of any paramours of Bennet Mater or Bennet Pater. As they engaged in unfruitful conjectures, they observed a lady step out, accompanied by two robot servants holding parasols over her head, doubly protecting her from the blistering sun and the curious eyes of the inhabitants of Liqua. When finally a knock came at the door and was answered, Lady Catherine de Bourgh stepped in.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Bennet Mater and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more unusually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyship’s entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.
Bennet Mater, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,
“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your mother.” Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
“And that I suppose is one of your sisters.”
“Yes, madam,” said Bennet Mater, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is already breeding, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man, with whom she will shortly be contracting.”
“You have a rather featureless patch of desert here.” “It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I assure you it has more scrub for the llamas than Senator Lucas’s grounds.” 
“This must be a more inconvenient sitting room in the dusty season, with no trees in front to block the wind.” 
“In the dusty season, we mostly sit upstairs,” Bennet Mater replied, and added, “May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Reverend Collins and Collins Mater well.” 
“Yes, very well. I saw them last night.”
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce some small gift from Catherine, perhaps her renowned camel cheese, as it seemed the only probably motive for her calling. But no gift appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Bennet Mater, with great civility, begged her ladyship to have some cactus tea; but Lady Catherine declined resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little grotto on one side of your grounds. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.”
“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship the grotto. I think she will enjoy the walk.”
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol, attended her esteemed guest downstairs. Lady Catherine’s two robot servants, who had waited outside the door, joined them and continued their office of providing shade to their owner as she and Elizabeth strode over the baking sands.
They proceeded in silence, as Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” she said, as she looked in her face.
As they neared the grotto, Lady Catherine began in the following manner: - “You can be at  no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I came.” Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
“Indeed, you are mistaken, madam. I have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here.”
“Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry tone. “you ought to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find me so. My character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me yesterday. I was told that not only your sister was on the point of concluding a most advantageous breeding contract, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would in all likelihood, be soon contracted to my nephew, my own nephew, Squire Darcy. Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him too so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”
“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, coloring with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”
“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.” 
“Your coming to Liqua, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth coolly, “will rather be a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in existence.” 
“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?” “I never heard that it was.”
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?” 
“l frankness with your ladyship. You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.” 
“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, offered you a breeding contract?” 
“Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.” 
“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But, I have observed, that he has a certain … weakness … for young lasses. Nothing he has ever acted upon, of course, as he is a noble and honourable scion of this family, but a predilection, perhaps, that could make him vulnerable to the arts and inducements of an unscrupulous schemer. You may have preyed upon his weakness and drawn him in.” 
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.” Elizabeth was hot with indignation for being suspected of using arts to encourage an unnatural attraction, but she was determined exude an icy cool.
“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”
“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behavior as this ever induce me to be explicit.”
“Let me be rightly understood. This contract, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never be yours. No, never.  It has already been arranged that Squire Darcy will breed with my daughter. Now what have you to say?”
“Only this; that if that is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me.”
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied: “The arrangement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both would be accomplished by their breeding together, to be prevented by a young woman of inferior genetics, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to any influential family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his tacit agreement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?” 
“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no other objection to my breeding with your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to breed with Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the contract. Its completion depended on others. If Squire Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?” 
“Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you willfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.” 
“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But, as influential as I know you are are, I believe that Darcy has his own independent influence, and the co-parent of Squire Darcy must have such access to the favors and benefits of the ruling class that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to worry, either for her own future or the future of those she loves.” 
“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you during the last clear season? Is nothing due to me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person’s whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.” 
“That will make your ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.” 
“I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended from forebears with the highest genetic quality – generations without the most trivial genetic deficiency. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young lass without connections or fortune whose family is riddled with genetic flaws. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to breed above your natural class.” 
“In breeding with your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that class. He is a flawless specimen of masculinity; but my DNA is as free from defects as his own; so far we are equal.” 
“To look at your phenotype, one might think so. However, the evidence of your family suggests otherwise. Look at your mother! Look at your uncles and aunts! Do not imagine me ignorant of their conditions.” 
“At least I am able to display all the signs of robust good health,” said Elizabeth, “which is more than you can claim for your daughter.” 
“My daughter is descended from the best bloodlines on Titan,” replied Lady Catherine, bristling. “Her relative fraility is due to the fact that she shared her  mother’s womb with a twin brother, and does not reflect on her DNA.” 
“Perhaps, but perhaps Darcy has reason to believe that I would be more able to produce healthy Darcy descendents than she is.” 
“Rubbish!” Lady Catherine announced imperiously. “Tell me once for all, have you and Darcy agreed to enter into a breeding contract?” 
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment’s deliberation: “We have not.”
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an agreement?” 
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
“Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young lass. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require.”
“And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Squire Darcy to breed with your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make a contract between them at all more probable? Supposing him to believe that I would make a better mother to his children than your daughter, would my refusing to accept his contract make him wish to offer it to his cousin? If he believes me to be superior in this regard to your daughter, then you can be sure that there are other prospects that he would find equally preferable. And for her part, if your daughter is not able to keep the interest of a man like Darcy, who has the security of status to be able choose on the basis of genetic quality alone, I am sure there are other prospects who could be persuaded to accept a little less vigor in a breeding partner in return for the social advantages that would accrue from entering into a contract with her.”
“Impertinent girl!” Lady Catherine scolded. “My desire for Darcy to contract with my daughter is based on an impartial evaluation of the interests of both and the dignity of the family.”
“Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.”
“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous escapade. I know it all; that the young man’s contract with her was a patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncles. The artfulness of your family of vixens knows no limits. And she only 16 years old! Is such a girl to be the aunt of my nephew’s children? Is her breeding partner, the son of his late father’s property manager, to be their uncle? Heaven and earth!—of what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered. “You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house.”
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.
“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.” 
“You are then resolved to have him?”
“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “have any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my breeding with Squire Darcy. And with regard to the indignation of the world, if the world would be shocked by such a turn of events, the world deserves to be shocked.”
“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point.”
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of the ferflivver, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the ferflivver lift off as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
“She did not choose it,” said her daughter, “she would go.” 
“She is a very fine-looking lady! I declare, biological men make the most fascinating women! I wonder,” Bennet Mater said speculatively, “if she prefers male or female paramours.” 
“And her calling here was prodigiously civil!” she continued, “for she only came, I suppose, to continue the acquaintance you had begun in Hanoi. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through Mandalay, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?” 
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.

Chapter 57
The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off a supposed breeding arrangement between her and Squire Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! But from what the report of their arrangement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that his being the intimate friend of Bingley, and her being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one contract made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the contract with her sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she regarded as unlikely and unworkable.

In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness. Lady Catherine had noticed Darcy’s inappropriate attraction to young women and very reasonably suspected that his feelings would interfere in the rationality of his judgment in choosing a breeding partner. Certainly Lady Catherine was perspicacious and had good reason to be concerned, but Elizabeth burned with indignation when she thought of Lady Catherine’s accusation that she used arts and wiles to take advantage of Darcy’s weakness! The very opposite was true! She hoped, she longed, for Darcy to recover from the agitation of passion and become the sort of man that one could consider breeding with! But, of course, without the blindness of romantic fervor, Darcy would see that his aunt was right – Elizabeth was sorely unqualified to be the mother of his children. What a dilemma – Elizabeth could hardly bear that Darcy would lose all interest in breeding with her and yet there was no possibility of a good resolution while he remained under the sway of infatuation!

“I must think of his welfare,” she told herself sternly. “I must hope that his passion for me is replaced by an appropriate attraction to an older woman, and that later, when his mind and his emotions are settled, he can set about finding a suitable mother for his children. If he can be thus satisfied, I will be satisfied too,” she told herself firmly. “And as for myself, I still have seven years to find a breeding partner, and since my family is has retained its respectability due to Darcy’s kind and exceptional interference, that should not provide too great a challenge.” And maybe, she thought, she and Darcy could be paramours someday. Half a lifetime later!

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Bennet Mater’s curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his den, his eyes shining with mischief.

“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you; come into my room.”

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by seeing that her father was looking at a email on his computer. It suddenly struck her that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations.

She followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down. He then said,

“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink of breeding. Let me congratulate you on attracting a very important prospect.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be gratified or alarmed at the possibility that he would consider pursuing his object through the influence of her father.

“You look conscious. Lasses have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may defy even your sagacity, to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Reverend Collins.”

“From Reverend Collins! And what can he have to say?”

“Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching  motherhood of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: ‘Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Collins Mater and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.’

“Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid genes, vast wealth, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure of a contract with this gentleman, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’

“Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:

“‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.’

“Squire Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I have surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related? Squire Darcy, who never looks at any lass but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life! It is admirable!”

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.

“Are you not diverted?”

“Oh! Yes. Pray read on.”

“‘After mentioning the likelihood of this breeding arrangement to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some objections to your family’s genetics, she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to you, that she and her propective co-parent may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a contract which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Reverend Collins moreover adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that Lydia’s sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their living together before the contract was settled should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they settled a contract. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Liqua, I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ That is his notion of Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of an heir. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be missish, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?”

“Oh!” cried Elizabeth, “I am excessively diverted. But it is so strange!”

“Yes—that is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but his obvious scorn for you as a breeding prospect, and your pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Reverend Collins’s correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value his impudence and hypocrisy. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Squire Darcy’s scorn, and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration. Perhaps, though, she told herself, her father was correct in his perception and Darcy’s former passion had already transformed into scorn. If so, she could only be gratified at this best of all possible resolutions to a painful situation.



Chapter 58

Bingley brought Darcy with him again to Liqua a few days after Lady Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Bennet Mater had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Bennet Mater was not in the habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps he was doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was high, she immediately said:

“Squire Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister, and hence to all of us. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Gardiner Mater was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them.”

“If you will thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might have added force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of you.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last Quadrember, tell me so at once. My affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak –

“My feelings are not what they were – I must admit they have undergone a profound change,” she said slowly. “Where I was once blinded by the most perverse prejudice and under the sway of the most unjust intelligence concerning your history, I now see with clarity the rare nobility of your character. Indeed, I have come to esteem your integrity, your intelligence and your kindness...” She spoke with difficulty and embarrassment. “In fact, I have come to care for you deeply and even tenderly.”

Joy and gratification kindled tentatively in Darcy’s breast, but there was a reserve in her tone that prevented him from giving way entirely to hope.

“That is why,” she continued, “I sincerely hope that you will soon be delivered of your unhealthy infatuation.”

“Unhealthy!” he retorted sharply, overcome with mortification and angry at the hope that had warmed him a moment before. “And how is this infatuation unhealthy?”

Her courage quailed at the sound of his anger, but she spoke in a steady voice, “Please Squire Darcy,” she said, “Give me the benefit of a fair hearing. I don’t wish to injure you, but I feel I must do my best to explain. My understanding of the nature of the relationship between men and women has undergone some maturation since we last talked together last year. I have how come to believe that you spoke the simple truth when you said that it was not uncommon for a man to be attracted to a lass, and to take pleasure in the prospect of breeding with her. I see now that that is a normal consequence of our animal nature.”

“It is not as an animal that I love you,” Darcy interjected hotly.

“Let me continue,” said Elizabeth. “These notions are difficult to express. I believe that attraction is not unnatural,” she repeated, “And in observing Bingley and Jane, I have, moreover, been persuaded that an affectionate and tender regard between breeding partners can only be beneficial to the enterprise of raising a family together.”

“What, then, is the problem?” said Darcy impatiently. “Do you or do you not feel an affectionate and tender regard for me?”

“I do,” said Elizabeth. “God help me, I do!” She took a deep breath. “But I fear that these  strong emotions that we harbour for each other are beyond mere affection and regard.”

“In that you are not mistaken!” said Darcy. “For I love you with a rare passion.”

“Yes,” said Elizabeth, reluctantly, “and that rare passion is precisely the object of my concern. Last year I responded to your offer with a lamentable lack of feeling and I now deeply regret that. I should have been kinder. However, the substance of my response to you then must remain the same today. The fundamental problem has not changed: passion is not a proper basis for a breeding  arrangement.” Elizabeth felt her stomach twist with misery, for she hating hurting Darcy and was loath to decline his offer, but she forced herself to continue. “Passion is too unstable, too apt to burn out, or to transform slowly into its opposite.” She dared not look at Darcy’s face, but stared intently at the ground as she walked. “Passion is turbulent and powerful, and cannot be controlled. It is impossible for  a breeding arrangement based on passion to provide a healthy and stable atmosphere in which to raise children.”

“You are wrong,” said Darcy in frustration. He saw that she did not trust his love. She did not understand his love. He took several furious strides and then turned back to look at Elizabeth. “You have misunderstood me,” he said, calmly but with great feeling.

“When I spoke of my passion for you, I was not talking about a fire in my blood that would blaze and fizzle out. I was not talking about a thirst that can be quenched,” Darcy dismissed this flimsy facsimile of love. “I was talking about a love that partakes of the elemental forces of the universe; I am drawn to you and bound to you by the same force that binds Titan to Saturn’s orbit. All I desire is to care for you, cherish you and devote my life to you.”

“That is not how things are done on Titan,” said Elizabeth, plainly.

“No,” Darcy said, with his color rising, “That is not how things have been done on Titan. Titan has robbed us of our birthright. Titan has seduced us with the offer of a secure life, at the cost of the noblest part of our nature. If we conform to the strictures of this absurd society and repress the ungovernable divinity inside us, we are allowed some snatches of happiness: we can raise a healthy family and romance paramours. These are fine things,” he said. “But we pay for those fine things by abandoning our claim to pursue a great thing. The greatest thing. Old-fashioned romantic love -- the selfless and enduring love that enables two people to create a single sublime life together -- is that great thing. Don’t you want the life that nature has formed you for? Don’t you want love?” Darcy’s characteristic dignity and reserve was shattered by his  strength of his emotions.

“You have been born out of time, Squire Darcy. You speak of love in the way that ancient Earthan novels speak of marriage.”

“Yes,” said Darcy, “That is my meaning exactly!” He spoke with ardent enthusiasm. “I don’t just want to breed with you, Elizabeth. I want to marry you.”

Elizabeth was thrilled to hear these archaic words of love and commitment, but she did not yield to the temptation to believe in their power.

“What is marriage but an old-fashioned word for a breeding contract?”

“Marriage,” said Darcy, “Is an agreement to be everything to each other. To be breeding partners, paramours and confidantes. To be intimate in every particular.”

She longed to believe in this intoxicating fantasy, but her reason rebelled.

“But marriages did not last!” she said, vehemently. “Have you forgotten the lessons of Earthan literature? Othello, Madame Bovary, Anna Karenina, Herzog…  Novels about romance end in marriage, but novels about marriage end in death, divorce or bitter resignation.”

“That’s literature, not life,” said Darcy, stubbornly.

“But the evidence from life is the same! By the time our ancestors left Earth, over half of all marriages failed.”

“While nearly half succeeded,” said Darcy. “I would rather take a chance on a life made glorious by love than accept the security of a merely satisfactory life.”

Elizabeth was moved by the power of his conviction… and she could not deny that a great prize was worth a great risk… and what prize could be greater than the possibility of living with Darcy, and loving Darcy, and being loved by Darcy, for the rest of her life? … And yet… To taste paradise and then lose it would be worse than facing the unknown horrors of Ganymede or Callisto... It would be unendurable... Oh, if she could only see the future! How would it all end? – Death, divorce, mutual loathing? – Or tender contentment built on a bedrock of mutual passion?

They walked in silence for several minutes past the grottos and into the saguaro grove, while Elizabeth’s love struggled to conquer her fear.

Finally, she stopped, looked up at Darcy with a mixture of vunerability, anguish and hope, and said, “It’s frightening.”

Darcy took her hands into his, looked at her tenderly, and said in a soft voice. “Are you frightened of me?”

She looked at his noble, familiar face, the face that had taken root in her subconscious and infiltrated her dreams, the face that was now alight with kindness, affection and tender ardour, and she realized that he was the one man in the world that she could never fear. Suddenly the clouds of uncertainty dispersed and everything was clear.

“No,” she said, “I’m not.”

“Then will you marry me?” he asked.

“Yes,” she said. “I will.”

The happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had never felt before. Heartfelt delight diffused over his face and Elizabeth felt an answering warmth fill her own body. They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects.

“But what shall we tell our families,” said Elizabeth at last. “They will be scandalized if we tell them how deeply in love we are.”

“So we will not tell them. It would only profane our joy to try to explain it to those that cannot comprehend it,” he said.  “We will just inform them that we have decided to settle a breeding contract.”

Elizabeth smiled.

“By the time they realize how devoted we are to each other,” Darcy continued, “it will be too late for their philistine objections to matter.”

“They will gossip,” said Elizabeth.

“So they will,” said Darcy.

“For what do we live but to make sport for our neighbors,” said Elizabeth, her eyes sparkling.

Darcy looked at her with curiosity.

“It’s just something that I learned from my father,” she said gaily.

With light hearts and ecstatic spirits, they reminisced as they walked, savoring all the misunderstandings, detours and happenstances that led them to this happy conclusion. After covering several miles in this leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home.

“What could have become of Squire Bingley and Jane!” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their forthcoming contract. Darcy was delighted with their plans; his friend had given him the earliest information of it.

“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case.

“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent, and particularly about the explanation for your family’s preponderance of daughters (which I had gleaned from Mandalay’s efficient network of gossips). His delight was tremendous. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their ability to raise a happy family together.”

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend.

“Do you think Bingley is in love?” asked Elizabeth.

“Bingley is an excellent man, but a simple one. I do not suppose him to be capable of the kind of transformative passion that has brought me such profound happiness...” Darcy paused and looked at Elizabeth with such elation that he almost forgot the subject under discussion. Recollecting himself, he continued, “I have no doubt, however, that Bingley has that affectionate and tender regard for Jane that you so wisely judge to be the basis of an agreeable family life.”

In anticipating the happiness of Bingley and Jane, which of course were to be inferior only to their own, they continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted.





Chapter 59


“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She colored as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The acknowledged breeding partners talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; even though they had determined to present their relationship as simply a breeding arrangement, while keeping their commitment to love each other secret, she feared the family’s disapproval. She was aware that no one liked Darcy but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

At night she broached the topic with Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!—breeding with Squire Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”

“This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still wants to breed with me, and I have agreed.”

Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! It cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”

“You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.”

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth.

“Good Heaven! Can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,” cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would—I do congratulate you—but are you certain? Forgive the question—are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?”

“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to be the happiest parents in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such nieces and nephews?”

“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! Do anything rather than contract with a man without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?”

“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do, when I tell you all.”

“What do you mean?”

“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry.”

“My dearest sister, now be serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?”

“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further to wish.

“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your co-parent, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Alpaca! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.”

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia’s settlement of a contract with Wickham. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.

“Good gracious!” cried Bennet Mater, as she stood at a window the next morning, “if that disagreeable Squire Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting lizards, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.”

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Bennet Mater, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again today?”

“I advise Squire Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Bennet Mater, “to walk to the Goathead Plateau this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Squire Darcy has never seen the view.”

“It may do very well for the others,” replied Squire Bingley; “but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?” 
Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Plateau, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Bennet Mater followed her, saying:

“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.”

During their walk, it was resolved that Bennet Pater’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Squire Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.

In the evening, soon after Bennet Pater withdrew to the den, she saw Squire Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means—that she, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her—was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Squire Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your father, he wants you in his den.” She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Squire Darcy.

“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?”

“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my indifference?”

“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”

“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes, “I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.”

“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your co-parent; unless you trusted him to be a kind and fair partner and a loving parent. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal contract. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in parenthood. You know not what you are about.”

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, only by repeated assurances that Squire Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that he was a good and kind a man as had ever lived, and enumerating with energy all his other good qualities, genetic, social and personal, she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the arrangement.

“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Squire Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.

“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing; made up the contract, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and would have paid him; but if he is so eager to have you as the mother of his children, he will not be inclined to quibble about money. I shall offer to pay him tomorrow; he will refuse, and there will be an end of the matter.”

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Reverend Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go—saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.

When her mother went up to her bedroom at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Bennet Mater sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a breeding partner to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

“Good gracious! Lord bless me! Only think! Dear me! Squire Darcy! Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! My sweetest Lizzy! How rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it—nothing at all. I am so pleased—so happy. Such a charming man!—so handsome! So tall!such impeccable genes!—Oh, my dear Lizzy! Pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters bred! With his influence, Mary and Kitty will be assured of staying on Titan as well! And ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.”

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.

“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! A hereditary governor and perhaps a president someday? And such an inheritance for your sons! But my dearest love, tell me what dish Squire Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it tomorrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behavior to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his ardent love, and unafraid at last to love him in return, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Bennet Mater luckily stood in such awe of the future father of her grandchildren that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Bennet Pater soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem. “If your offspring resemble their parents, they will be intelligent, sensible and good-looking. And if they do not, at least they will be rich!”



Chapter 60


Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Squire Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on obstinately, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?”
“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun.”
“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners—my behavior to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”
“For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”
“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the lasses who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike them. Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the lasses who so assiduously courted you. There—I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me—but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.”
“You underestimate my discernment when you think that I could not detect the good in you. I judged quite early on that in both nubility of body and quality of mind you were exceptionally well-designed for motherhood. I saw, moreover, that you exhibited a fine array of traits beneficial to a parent– kindness, honesty, patience, courage, and, above all, a natural resiliance of spirit that springs from a high valuation of your own worth. I was impressed that my outspoken scorn for you seemed to amuse rather than distress you.  I knew that such a mother would be able to handle with grace the frustrations and occasional heartaches inevitably attached to raising children.”
“So you judged me to be well-qualified for breeding, in defiance of popular opinion?” 
“Let us just say that I saw your potential to be a good mother for another man’s children. However, as you, lamentably, know all too well, I was not persuaded that you were altogether the wisest choice of breeding partner for me.” 
“Indeed, I do remember that detail.”
“It was only after I had abandoned my rational assessment of your qualifications and listened to my ungovernable heart that I realized that you were the only one I wanted to breed with,” continued Darcy. “For that, I can give no explanation. The logic of the heart is impenetrable.”
“And so,” said Elizabeth, smiling, “Love conquers prudence, and we are to be paramours as well as breeding partners.”
“Yes.”
“But, Squire Darcy,” said Elizabeth doubtfully, her expression changing from playful to serious, “have you considered that mothers are rather too fully occupied by the demands of offspring to be available for romance?”
“Wasn’t it ever thus in the history of our species?” responded Darcy. “Love finds its way through the tumult of daily life.”
“I think that you have read too many romances and not enough history,” said Elizabeth teasingly. “It is my impression that on Earth, babies inevitably brought a great deal of strain to the marital relationship, often leaving no time or energy for romance.” She frowned. “And that was frequently true even when circumstances were far more favorable for mothers than here on Titan. In the past few centuries on Earth, childrearing duties were shared equally between the mother and father, household upkeep was considerably easier than on this primitive Colony, and parents were able to avail themselves of outside childcare and schools to mind the children during the day.”
“Titan does indeed present special difficulties,” said Darcy, gravely. “When considered in this light, it is unsurprising that romance is considered the domain of older women here. But,” he continued, “our abiding love for each other will help us to overcome whatever difficulties we meet.”
Elizabeth smiled wistfully and said, “Marriages usually began with love. But love often failed as practical problems became overwhelming.”
“That would not happen with us,” said Darcy stubbornly. “I would not allow it!” He spoke with the imperious command of Canute ordering the waves to retreat. He paused, however, to consider the logistical problem. “You have perhaps forgotten, Miss Bennet, that I am very well off,” he continued. “Pemberley is overflowing with servants, who will tend to your every need.”
“That’s true,” said Elizabeth, with half a smile. “But robot servants cannot raise children.” 
“No,” said Darcy, judiciously, “but they can handle the animal management, tend the crops, cook, clean the house, and relieve you myriads of other tiresome duties that many mothers are burdened with,” Darcy continued. “And I will lend my own energy and talents to the nurture and education of our offspring, when unencumbered by professional duties.” 
“Which will be seldom enough, I suppose,” said Elizabeth skeptically.
Darcy laughed, and considered further. “My grandmother will also help,” he proposed. “She is a very affectionate woman and doted over me as a child. It is perhaps our good fortune that she does not have a very active love-life, and will be sure to have time to look after the children when we have planned a romantic evening or an excursion.”
“Perhaps it can work,” said Elizabeth. The thought of romantic excursions with Darcy was sufficient to fill her heart with an airy optimism and her eyes shone in anticipation of such delights.
“And don’t forget that we will share a bed every night,” added Darcy, with a long glance at Elizabeth that comprehended both solemnity and joy.
Elizabeth’s heart leapt and her face flushed.
“We will make it work,” she said, her native confidence returning in full force. “We will be pioneers in love.” She laughed gleefully. “Where the illustrious Fitzwilliam Darcy goes, all of Titan society will want to follow. Soon it will be all the rage to be in love with your breeding partner!”
“What a scandal!” said Darcy.
“Will Lady Catherine ever forgive us, do you think?” said Elizabeth.
“I hope not!” said Darcy.


Chapter 61

Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Bennet Mater saw her two most deserving daughters formalize contracts that ensured their futures on Titan. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Bingley Mater, and talked of Darcy Mater, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; but, although she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly, she was unquestionably a most devoted grandmother.

Bennet Pater missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a tenmonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and Mandalay relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he purchased a mineshare in a nearby town in New Arabia, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other. Bingley and Jane were happy and affectionate co-parents who remained warmly attached to each other for the rest of their lives, even though, as irredeemably conventional people, they both enjoyed paramours from time to time.

Mary’s character blossomed with the security of knowing that Darcy’s influence would save her from exile even if she were not able to find a breeding partner. She began to read for the pleasure of developing her ideas rather than for the sake of displaying her native intelligence to prospective breeding partners, and she nurtured her latent capacity for free thinking. Within a few years, she became a leading activist for change on Titan. Although her proposal to raise women to full equality in the governance of the Colony was too far ahead of its time to have an immediate effect, her granddaughters benefited from her pioneering agitation. More successful in the short term was her campaign to allow men to have more than one breeding partner, which resulted in the rescue of thousands of lasses from exile. Later in life, she established a school which allowed young mothers to have some respite from their offspring, freeing up some hours of every day for them to devote to social activism, self improvement or the enjoyment of paramours. Mary’s particular duty at the school was to teach the younger generation of Titan to value liberty, democracy and the inherent dignity of every human being.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with Mary. Although not as earnest as Mary by nature, she imbibed the values of her older sister as she gradually discarded those of Lydia, and learned to appreciate the joys of an intellectual life. She eventually became the second breeding partner to one of the teachers at Mary’s school, and raised five progressive children, one of whom became the first woman on Titan’s board of governors.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution. He bore with philosophy the operation which deprived him of his special interest in little girls and became a tolerably affectionate father, though no operation could deprive him of his innate selfishness, unreliability and profligacy. Lydia found motherhood wearisome, but bore five children in ten years, with the happy result that she was free to pursue paramours before she had reached the age of forty. Beautiful, vivacious and living in the frontier Colony of Juno, where men vastly outnumbered women, Lydia found herself much sought after as a paramour, to her profound delight.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s choice of breeding partner; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.
 
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the conclusion of the co-parental contract of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or to her curiosity to see her nephews and nieces; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a co-parent, but also from the visits of her genetically and socially deficient uncle and aunt.

With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into New Arabia, had been the means of uniting them.

Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. Through Elizabeth and Darcy’s example, she came to learn that a man may love his breeding partner as ardently as one loves a paramour, and that even on Titan, co-parents can sometimes achieve an old-fashioned lifelong devotion to each other.

 


