The next day, Elizabeth received an email informing her that the Gardiners were visiting the Philipses the following morning. She was delighted to hear this, as her mind had been heavily burdened by misgivings regarding the possible future activities of her sister’s new breeding partner and she felt that only a conference with the Gardiners could hope to relieve her feelings.

The next morning, she rose early, saddled her favorite llama, a light-footed pinto called Jacqui, and rode out to have a private discussion with her aunt and uncle.

In order to ensure discretion, she invited the Gardiners to take a stroll with her on the Philips’s grounds.



“Well, Lizzy,” Gardiner Mater said with a smile. “What is it that has roused you out of bed with such urgency this morning?”



Elizabeth was unsure how to start, but having come so far, decided that it would be foolish to waste time on pleasantries.



“First of all, I want to express my deepest gratitude for all you have done. You and, of course, Squire Darcy, have not only saved Lydia, but saved all of us from an unthinkable fate,” said Elizabeth.



“You know that we were more than happy to do so, Lizzy,” said Gardiner Mater. “You need not thank us for doing what was in our interests as much as yours.” She smiled. “We could not bear to lose you!”



“Thank you. I deeply appreciate the futures that have been preserved for us,” she continued. She took a deep breath. “But I worry that we have purchased our chances of a future on Titan at too great a cost.” She sighed. “Not to Lydia – she has come out of this much better than she deserves. But I am worried, haunted, by the possible consequences of continuing to cover up Wickham’s predilictions.”



Elizabeth paused, struggling to admit to a foreboding that she was reluctant to express and yet knew that she could not leave unexpressed.



“I am afraid that he could lead other young girls to ruin,” she said, at last. “Girls for whom no mechanism could be fabricated to save their reputations.”



Gardiner Pater looked at her with admiration and approval. “This concern of yours is evidence of a very fine moral sense,” he said. “And it is a very real concern. Fortunately I have it within my powers to relieve your mind entirely on this subject.”



“You have?” said Elizabeth with surprise.



“Squire Darcy and I had similar fears,” Gardiner Pater explained. “We both agreed that we could not be responsible for allowing Wickham to remain at liberty if that would give him the opportunity to repeat his offence with another innocent child.  After some consideration, we decided to use Darcy’s influence to arranged a private hearing with a judge, and in this way had Wickham convicted of deviancy with a minor. He was only able to preserve his freedom by agreeing to submit to a treatment that would eliminate all of his carnal desires.”



Elizabeth was shocked. “Are you referring,” she said in a low voice, “to chemical castration?”



“Chemical castration is not reliable enough,” said Gardiner Pater. “I am referring to castration.”



“Oh,” Elizabeth said in a small voice.



“The procedure will be carried out in Fecundia after his removal there. But first, a quantity of his sperm will be preserved so that he and Lydia can fulfill their duty to have a full cohort of children.”



She took a few minutes to process this new information and finally said, “Poor Lydia.” She reflected that, whereas Charlotte would no doubt have been grateful to be relieved of the duty of conceiving children the natural way, Lydia was unlikely to feel the same way.



Gardiner Pater smiled gently. “Lydia is scarcely more than a child,” he said. “She is too young for the kind of delights that Wickham has introduced her to. But she will soon be too fully occupied in raising a family to miss the pleasures of the flesh. And it is perhaps fortunate for Lydia that she is so young. She will only be in her thirties when her children are old enough to free her for other pursuits. At that time she will find ample opportunity for sampling the pleasures on offer in a frontier populated primarily by men.”



Elizabeth said nothing. She thought that perhaps Gardiner Pater had forgotten that he was talking to an innocent lass and not a mature woman, and she tried to disguise her embarrassment.



Finally she said, “Thank you for putting my mind at ease. Indeed, I no longer need to fear for the daughters of Fecundia.” She smiled, and recovered her countenance sufficiently to look Gardiner Pater in the eye.  “I truly cannot thank you enough. You and Squire Darcy have arranged everything beautifully.”



“But castration!” Gardiner Mater suddenly interjected, having mulled the thought over in her mind these last few minutes. “That is such a medieval solution! Do  you not feel some pity for a man whose indecent proclivities were not of his own choosing?”



Elizabeth felt her anger toward Wickham surge again in her breast. “It is not his proclivities that make him wicked,” she said warmly. “but the fact that he chose to indulge those proclivities at the cost of a young girl’s future. That is what makes him worthy of contempt! and punishment!”



Elizabeth’s indignation was just and Gardiner Mater felt her momentary pity for Wickham wane.



“Moreover,” Elizabeth continued, “There is every reason to believe that Lydia was not his first victim. I am greatly relieved to be assured that she will be his last.”



They walked around a small cluster of palm trees that marked the edge of Philips Pater’s grounds and turned back to the house, whereupon Gardiner Pater reflected, “How perplexing it is that Squire Darcy should want to keep you in the dark on his involvement in this matter.” The three friends continued in silence for a moment, contemplating this peculiarity.



“Though it would be remarkable for Squire Darcy to undergo all this trouble just to impress a potential breeding partner,” continued Gardiner Pater thoughtfully, “it is not inconceivable. I can understand that a man as proud as Darcy feels that he must have the very best for his children. Having once convinced himself that you were the very best possible mother, it would not be out of character for him to put a considerable amount of effort into securing his prize.



“But,” he  continued, with an air of perplexity, “To do all that he has done and then to try to prevent you from learning about it… I cannot make any sense of it.”

 

“You flatter me, uncle,” said Elizabeth, “Is it not simpler to conjecture that he really was motivated only by his own exacting conscience. Distressed with the guilt of having obscured Wickham’s true nature from the world, he felt an obligation to put things right. And  this he has done, handsomely.” She paused. “There is no reason to think that his actions have anything to do with me.”



Elizabeth felt the force of her own words; it was surely more plausible that Darcy was uncommonly scrupulous than that he would take such extraordinary pains on behalf of a lass of middling genetic endowment and indifferent accomplishments.



“You may be right,” said Gardiner Mater, looking at her niece thoughtfully. “But then again, Lizzy, you may be wrong.”







A few days after this visit, Squire Bingley called again to Liqua, and alone. His friend had left him that morning for NeoLondon, but was to return home in ten days’ times. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits. Bennet Mater invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concerns, he confessed that he had business at the mine to attend to.

“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.” He should be particularly happy at any time, &c. &c.; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.

“Can you come tomorrow?”

Yes, he had no engagement at all for tomorrow; and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Bennet Mater to her daughters’ room, in her camelhair robe and tasselled slippers, crying out,

“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come – Squire Bingley is come. – He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste.”

“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! Hang Kitty! What has she to do with it? Come, be quick, be quick! Where is your sash, my dear?”

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening. After tea, Bennet Pater retired to his den, as was his custom, and Mary went upstairs to her lute. Two obstacles of the five being thus removed, Bennet Mater sat looking and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter mamma? Why do you keep winking? Is the dust getting in your eye?”

“It’s nothing, child, nothing. The dust never bothers me.” She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty, “Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that she would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Bennet Mater half-opened the door and called out,

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

Elizabeth was forced to go.

“We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother, as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in my bedroom.”

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the family room.

Bennet Mater’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was every thing that was charming, except the purveyor of a breeding contract. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay to supper; and before he went away, an engagement was formed,  chiefly through his own and Bennet Mater’s means, for his coming next morning to shoot lizards with Bennet Pater.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded. Surely, Bingley’s renewed attentions meant that he had learned that the most serious objection proposed to his breeding with Jane, that Jane might not be able to give him a son, was baseless, and that he had been given permission by Darcy, to use his own judgement in deeming Jane a worthy mother to his children.

Bingley was punctual in his appointment; and he and Bennet Pater spent the morning together productively, bagging enough lizards for a feast. Bennet Pater was much more agreeable than his companion expected. With the repercussions of Lydia’s folly so nearly bringing disaster to his entire family, Bennet Pater had repented of his carefree and satirical attitude towards breeding arrangements. He now took seriously his duty to facilitate opportunities for his daughters to breed, and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than Bingley had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Bennet Mater’s invention was again at work to get everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the kitchen for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to play monopoly, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

But on returning to the family room, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough, but hers she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other, had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

“Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh! Why is not everybody as happy?’

Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said for the present.

“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! To secure my own future on Titan, to be able to help my sisters find breeding contracts … these are but the smallest part of my joy! For the greatest part is knowing that I will be able to breed with such a man, and to have such children! How shall I bear so much happiness!”

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the monopoly game, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which the agreement was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.

“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious circumspection! Of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! The happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her father had been short and to the purpose.

He then came up to her and said, “Now, dearest Elizabeth, you must wish us well in our design to furnish you with a passel of nieces and nephews!”

“Indeed I do!” replied Elizabeth. “The two of you will make excellent parents, and your offspring are guaranteed to be intelligent, healthy and good-natured. I can think of no two people with a better chance at genetic compatibility!”

“She is the most motherly of creatures!” Bingley said effusively. “Nubile, graceful, kind, intelligent and empathetic. No child could hope for a better caregiver. Whatever nature begins with promise, her nurture will bring to perfection!”

Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding and the super-excellent disposition of Jane, and the intelligence, health and good looks of both that spoke of immaculate genetics.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennett’s mind gave a glow of such sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Bennet Mater could not give stop talking about what beautiful babies the two of them would make and how affectionate a grandmother she herself would be; and when Bennet Pater joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter, and said,

“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman, and your children will have a father who is both kind and influential.”

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.

“You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of the two of you breeding successfully and co-parenting cooperatively. The only danger I can foresee in raising children with a man of such easy temperament is that he will spoil the children and exceed his income in  his indulgence of them.”

“Exceed his income! My dear Bennet Pater,” cried his co-parent, “what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh! My dear, dear Jane. I am so happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must  be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so nubile for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came to Mexistan last year, I thought how likely it was that you two should breed. Oh! He is the most genetically well-endowed young man that ever was seen!”

“And financially well-endowed too,” added her father, approvingly.

Wickham, Lydia were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her mother’s favorite child. And her happiness was not limited to her gratification that Jane’s future was secured; it was augmented by the anticipation that Jane’s future connections would enable her three remaining daughters to find their own preservatives from the horror of exile.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Liqua; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining until after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself obliged to accept. Of course, the neighbours were informed that Bingley had offered a contract to Jane, but they would not entirely abandon hope for their own daughters until a genetic counselor had cleared Bingley and Jane for breeding.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister, but plenty of time to observe the two prospective parents together. She knew that Jane was blissfully in love with Bingley, which was right and proper, but she could also see that Bingley admired Jane immensely. Was this admiration similar to love? She thought of Darcy’s claim that no man would enter into a breeding contract with a lass that he was not attracted to. Was it true, she wondered? Bingley certainly thought very highly of Jane, enjoyed quietly gazing at her, and treated her with eager solicitation. How, Elizabeth wondered, was this different than the “love” Darcy claimed to feel for her?

Certainly, there is a difference, she told herself. Affectation, solicitude, and even attraction, were positive emotions that would bode well for the intricate cooperation that raising children together entailed. But love, especially the passionate kind of love expressed by Darcy, was a destabilizing factor in a relationship. Love invited jealousy, suspicion and even hate into the family, and passion produced turbulence.

Elizabeth wondered once again if passion could be cooled and tempered into regard, respect and rational affection. But no, she thought, passion probably just burns itself out, leaving a black hole of indifference.

Her thoughts were interrupted one evening by Jane when Bingley was occupied with business. “He has made me so happy,” she said, “by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town during the last clear season. I had not believed it possible.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account for it?” 

“It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, what robust babies I give to their brother, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we can never be what we once were to each other.” 

“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.” 

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last Nonember, he had already decided that I would be the  mother of his children. That is, until he became concerned that I would not be able to bear sons. When it occurred to him that a family with five daughters must have a genetic deficiency, he quite naturally changed his plan.” Jane sighed. “How fortunate that my father was able to let the truth be known before Bingley had made an offer to another lass!” 

“Indeed!” said Elizabeth.

“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried Jane. “Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled out from my family, and blessed above them all! If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such another man for you!”

“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Reverend Collins in time.”

When genetic counseling proclaimed Jane and Bingley to be compatible, the other families of Mandalay relinquished all hope of their daughters breeding with Bingley, and the Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away, they had generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.