Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.
The park was very large, and contained, as Gardiner Mater had promised, one of the only real woods on Titan. They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful park stretching over a wide extent. The woods were planted with fig trees, monkey-puzzles and sausage trees interspersed with flowering cacti, creeping jenny and other wild blossoms, all genetically engineering to thrive in Titan’s terraformed climate, though maintained only at considerable cost.  The effect was reminiscent of the English woods that Elizabeth had experienced in the holodeck at Rosings, though the trees were less leafy and the air was dryer. Even the ground under the camels’ feet, composed of a mixture of common black sand and rare white sand, evoked an English soil.
Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a large holographic projection of verdant hills; and in front, a stream was artfully constructed to look natural, its banks neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She had never seen a place more exotically Earth-like or more beautiful. They were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the innkeeper had been mistaken. On knocking at the door, they were admitted by an elderly woman who introduced herself as Squire Darcy’s maternal grandmother, Reynolds Mater. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
“And in this place,” thought she, “I might have been enscounced! With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own son’s future estate, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,”—recollecting herself—”that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”
This was a lucky recollection—it saved her from something very like regret.
She longed to inquire of Reynolds Mater whether her grandson were really absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Reynolds Mater replied that he was, adding, “But we expect him tomorrow, with a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture window. She approached and saw a scene with two little boys playing cowboys and aliens on the lawn outside. It was Squire Wickham and Squire Darcy, explained Reynolds Mater, recorded about twenty years ago.
Her aunt said they were adorable, and commented how wonderful it must be to savor this idyllic scene of the past whenever you glanced out of a window.
Another picture window showed a young man in the winner’s circle after a camel race, and Reynolds Mater told them it was Squire Wickham, the son of her Darcy Pater’s estate manager, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”
Gardiner Mater looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.
“And that,” said Reynolds Pater, pointing to another of the picture windows, “is my grandson giving a speech in the Senate. It was taken at the same time as the other—about eight years ago.”
“I have heard much of your grandson’s fine person,” said Gardiner Mater, looking at the picture window; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether or not he has changed.”
Reynolds Mater respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her grandson.
“Does that young lass know Fitzwilliam?”
Elizabeth coloured, and said: “A little.”
“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman?” 
“Yes, very handsome.”
“I am sure I know none so handsome. In the gallery up stairs you will see some finer, larger picture windows with scenes from the Earth and various colonies, as well as oil paintings of everyone in the family. This room was Darcy Pater’s favourite room, and these picture windows are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them.”
Reynolds Mater then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, taken when she was only eight years old, playing with a pet pig.
“And is Miss Darcy as genetically well-endowed as her brother?” said Gardiner Mater.
“Oh! Yes—the most nubile young lass that ever was seen; and so accomplished!—She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her—a present from Fitzwilliam; she comes here to-morrow with him.”
Gardiner Pater, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Reynolds Mater, with pride and attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her grandchildren.
“Is Squire Darcy much at Pemberley in the course of the year?” 
“Not so much as I could wish; but I dare say he may spend half his time here; and Georgiana is always down for the cold season.” 
“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Mendelsberg.” 
“If Squire Darcy would breed, you might see more of him.” 
“Yes, but I do not know when that will be. I do not know who is good enough for him to breed with.” 
Gardiner Pater and Gardiner Mater smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.” 
“I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth put this down to a grandmother’s natural bias, but she listened with astonishment as Reynolds Mater added, “I have never known a cross word from him in my life. Even as a two-year-old he was more temperate than terrible.” 
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying: “There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in having such a grandson.” 
“Yes, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.” 
Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Squire Darcy?” thought she.
“His father was an excellent man,” said Gardiner Pater.
“Yes, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him—just as affable to the poor.” 
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Reynolds Mater could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of other pictures windows, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture, in vain. Gardiner Pater, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her grandson, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
“He is the best of the Colony’s hereditary Governors,” said she, “that ever lived; not like other wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one person in the government but will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”
“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.
“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”
“Perhaps we might be deceived.”
“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.” 
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when last at Pemberley.
“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.
Reynolds Mater anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for her.”
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained be shown.
In the latter were impressive views in the picture windows of beautiful scenery from every continent of the Earth, as well as scenes from Ganymede, Callisto and Earth’s moon.  These, Reynolds Mater explained, were not on five minute loops like the small picture windows downstairs, but rather were stored with several years of footage that showed the natural changes of their locations in real time.
In the gallery there were many family portraits done in oil, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her—and she beheld a striking resemblance to Squire Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Reynolds Mater informed them that it had been painted in his father’s lifetime.
There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Reynolds Mater was of no trifling nature. Who knew his character better than his own grandmother? Every idea that had been brought forward by the Reynolds Mater was favourable to his character, and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of Reynolds, were consigned over to the robot gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjecturing as to size of the estate’s robotic staff, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Squire Darcy, the robot gardener’s greeting confirmed it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left Liqua, and of her having stayed in New Arabia, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.
At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! Why did she come? Or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived—that moment alighted from his camel carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered—what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!—but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address at the stables of Reverend Collins, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Squire Darcy then was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind—in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been that in his voice which was not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure. Of course, she did not wish him to be in love with her, she could not wish that his mind was still troubled by a deviant passion, but it was tempting to imagine that his inappropriate ardency could cool to something like respectable admiration and affection.
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the distant holographic hills, and occasionally part of the stream. Gardiner Pater expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round. That settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the rocky canyon allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Gardiner Mater, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the camel cart as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Gardiner Pater, was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some fish in the water that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Squire Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk here being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said no more. She would not allow him to suppose that she was imagining Pemberley as a playground for her children.
Gardiner Mater was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of good pedigree.”
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was surprised by the connection was evident; he sustained it, however, with fortitude, and so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with Gardiner Pater. Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush, though were Gardiner Pater to succumb to an asthma attack, his inferior genetics could not be concealed. She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.
The conversation soon turned upon fish, since Gardiner Pater had never before seen fish swimming freely in a stream and was fascinated with their beauty and grace. He heard Squire Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to have a turn in his holodeck, which was attached to a large pool in the basement of Pemberley. Gardiner Pater was urged to visit at his leisure to experience snorkelling in the Maldives, the Great Barrier Reef or the Galapagos Islands. Gardiner Mater, who was walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for me—it cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hanoi could not work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love me.” And though she repeated to herself that such enduring love in the face of such rejection was impossible, and undesirable, she could not help but find the possibility extremely flattering.
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Gardiner Mater, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her co-parent’s. Squire Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence, the lass spoke first. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected—”for your grandmother,” she added, “informed us that you would certainly not be here till tomorrow; and indeed, before we left Beihai, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.” 
He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business with the estate had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early tomorrow,” he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you—Squire Bingley and his sisters.”
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Squire Bingley’s name had been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind was not very differently engaged.
“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Alpaca?”
The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment and frustrated ardour had not made him think really ill of her.
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the camel cart, the Gardiners were half a quarter of a mile behind.
He then asked her to walk into the house—but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of impact craters and cryovolcanos with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was over. On the Gardiners’s coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Squire Darcy handed the ladies into the cart; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected. “He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.
“There is something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her aunt, “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with his grandmother, that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it.”
“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”
“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so conspicuously genetically superior as Wickham; or, rather, he has not Wickham’s physique, for there is no sign of genetic flaw in his constitution. But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?”
Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could; said that she had liked him better when they had met in Darwin than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning.
“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore, as much as I would love to snorkel in his holodeck, I shall not take him at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his estate.”
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing.
“From what we have seen of him,” continued Gardiner Mater, “I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a generous grandson, I suppose, and that in the eye of a maternal grandmother comprehends every virtue.”
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Darwin, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Mexistan. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.
Gardiner Mater was surprised and concerned; but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her co-parent all the interesting spots in its environs to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance. Gardiner Pater meanwhile set off in quest of a former paramour and his evening was likewise spent in pleasurable intercourse with an old companion. Gardiner Mater, being not yet of an age for paramours, was somewhat envious of Gardiner Pater’s good fortune, but she bid him all the delights commonly attendant upon such an engagement.
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these social activities; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Squire Darcy’s civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.