Reverend Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his breeding partner, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady Catherine’s condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.
“I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by her ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!”
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. The reverend was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, so that the sight of rooms fitted with such sophisticated electronics, so many robot servants and such exotic dishes, might not wholly overpower them.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth— “Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear lass, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever sari is superior to the rest—there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of status preserved.” 
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas, though her curiousity was also piqued as she was eager to see how elegant a lady the former lord had become.
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about two miles across the desert. Unlike the endless expanse of untended desert they had crossed to arrive at Hanoi, this stretch was beautified with pink wildflowers among the cactuses and the occasional stately palm tree. At the approach of Rosings, moreover, there was a fanciful stone garden with grey grottos, rock statues and a lilypond, floating like an enchanted island on a black ocean of sand. Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Reverend Collins expected the scene to inspire.
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment increasing, and even Senator Lucas did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard no rumours of Lady Catherine that spoke of either extraordinary talents or disconcerting perversity, and the mere stateliness of money or power she thought she could witness without trepidation.
In the entrance-hall, Reverend Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportions and the large picture windows, each portraying, with electronic wizardry, a different scene; one appearing to overlook a patch of Kenyan savana, another a village in Yorkshire and yet another a mountain temple in Hunan. From there, they followed the welcoming robots through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Jenkinson Mater were sitting. Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them and the proper introductions were made.
In spite of having been at the council, Senator Lucas was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features that hinted at the handsome man she had once been. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. Lady Catherine was an unusual combination: a man by birth and biology, a woman by choice, dress and air; and although she exuded an elegant femininity, there was one characteristic that she retained from her birth sex, and that was her confidence. No other woman on Titan could have been as regal and commanding as one who was born with, and retained, all the rights of a man.
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance to Squire Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies, and that she had a very different genetic legacy was easily apparent. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not positively defective, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Jenkinson Mater, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said.
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to the Yorkshire window to admire the view, Reverend Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was more worth looking at in the summer, for each picture window changed in real time and followed Earthan seasons as faithfully as their subjects had when they were recorded.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the robotic servants and all the articles of plate which Reverend Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Senator Lucas, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his daughter’s breeding partner said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them, as many did, such as the roast beef obtained from the only cattle herd on Titan, and the shrimp raised in the pond in the garden. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh—the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, while the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time. Jenkinson Mater was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her llamas and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady’s attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Charlotte, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who she observed to Charlotte was a very nubile lass whose intelligent air suggested the probability of a good genetic foundation. She asked her, at different times, how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them had promising prospects of breeding, whether they were shapely, what skills they had developed, what sort of ferflivver her father kept, and what had been her mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then observed,
“Your father’s estate is promised to the church, I think. For your sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for denying females the right to inheritance. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?”
“A little.”
“Oh! Then—some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. We have a capital positronic organ, probably superior to anything you have encountered before. But perhaps you are more comfortable on the lute or the violin? You shall display for us some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”
“One of them does.”
“Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss Watanamis all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do you draw?”
“No, not at all.”
“What, none of you?”
“Not one.”
“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. You have at least the practical skills of furniture-making, sewing, family nutrition, etc., I hope.”
“Yes.”
“Ah well, those skills are hardly sufficient to signal genetic superiority, but at least they can reassure a man of your capacity to raise children. Are any of your sisters on the market?”
“Yes, ma’am, all.”
“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The younger ones out before the elder ones have bred! Your younger sisters must be very young?”
“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps she is full young to be much on display. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to breed early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”
“Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”
“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
“You cannot be more than twenty-five, I am sure, therefore you need not conceal your age.”
“I am not three-and-twenty.”
“Well, there’s time enough then, but I hope you attract an offer soon. The scent of desperation can so quickly taint the natural motherly aura of a young lass.”
When the gentlemen had joined them, and coffee was over, the party repaired to the holodeck, which was a new and thrilling experience for most of the party. At the touch of a few icons on a monitor, the basement of Rosings was transformed into a rolling English countryside on a summer’s day. Each guest was introduced to a virtual horse and they were invited to pursue a virtual fox. Lady Catherine was, of course, the master of the hunt, and the women, thankfully, were allowed to ride astride their mounts rather than sidesaddle. In spite of this concession, it was a difficult task, as none of them had ridden anything but llamas and camels before. But though the ride was unsteady and hedges were jumped with great trepidation, the experience was magical. Elizabeth had seen videos of the earth  and had always been fascinated by England, the home of her ancestors, but she had never before felt surrounded by an English summer’s day, the mild sun and the dampness of the air feeling both alien and strangely familiar. The pursuit of the fox was the farthest thing from her thoughts, as she was enchanted by the trees, the flowers, the clouds, the woodlands, the fields and the stream. When Lady Catherine declared the fox dead and the game over, Elizabeth reluctantly followed the others out of the basement and thought, for the first time, that to be rich would really be a very fine thing.
After a sherry and a biscuit to console them on their return to reality, a gyrocopter was offered to Reverend Collins and, upon its gratefully acceptance, a robot servant was immediately dispatched to prepare it. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the gyrocopter; and with many speeches of thankfulness on the reverend’s side, and as many bows on the senator’s, they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by the reverend to give her opinion on the mistress of Rosings, which, for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was, for apart from her possession of a holodeck, Elizabeth found little to admire in Lady Catherine. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Reverend Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship’s praise into his own hands.