Bennet Pater’s living was derived almost entirely from a position as a law clerk worth five hundred a year, which would scarcely be enough to keep his family in comfort, were it not for a modest but agreeable home inherited from a distant relation. Unfortunately, given that he had no sons, there was no one in the family to inherit the property or earn a living after his death. That his daughters secured good breeding contracts, therefore, was essential not only to their continued existence on Titan but even to the shelter and sustainance of Bennet Mater after the demise of her co-parent.
The village of Liqua was only ten miles from Mandalay; a most convenient distance for the young lasses to travel by llama, and they were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a boutique just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions; their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing better offered, a trip to Mandalay was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news the colony in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of an aeronautical regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole of the dusty season, as planetary exploration for new mining sites would have to wait until the sand storms had quite passed.
Their visits to Phillips Mater were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the astronauts’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the astronauts themselves. Phillips Pater visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but astronauts; and Squire Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the devilish gallantry of an astronaut.
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Bennet Pater coolly observed:
“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the Colony. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced.”
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to NeoLondon.
“I am astonished, my dear,” said Bennet Mater, “that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own.”
“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”
“Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”
“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.”
“My dear Bennet Pater, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother. What would it profit them to be serious? Of course, they ought to wait until they are closer to my age before dreaming of dalliances with astronauts. I like an explorer myself very well, and if a smart young colonel should show an interest, I shall not say nay to him. I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Senator Lucas’s...” Bennet Mater trailed off dreamily and then recovered herself. “But, indeed, there are some astronauts that have not yet become fathers and may be interested in one of my girls as a breeding partner. In such a case, liveliness of spirits will answer better to their genetic quality than a solemn demeanor.”
Bennet Pater was about to take issue with Bennet Mater regarding the desirability of astronauts as co-parents, when Jane announced the arrival of an email from Netherfield. Bennet Mater’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,
“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”
“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.
“MY DEAR FRIEND,--
“If you are not so compassionate as to dine today with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day’s tete-a-tete between two ladies can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the astronauts.--Yours ever,
“CAROLINE BINGLEY”
“With the astronauts!” cried Lydia. “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of that.”
“Dining out,” said Bennet Mater, “that is very unlucky.”
“Can I have the ferflivver?” said Jane.
“No, my dear, you had better go on llamaback because it seems likely to storm; and then you must stay all night.”
“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home before the storm hits.”
“Oh! But the gentlemen will have Squire Bingley’s ferflivver to go to Mandalay.”
“I had much rather go in the ferflivver.”
“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the fuel, I am sure. You are very low on resources are you not, Bennet Pater?”
“I am always low on resources, and I would that you were always so frugal.”
Jane was therefore obliged to go on llamaback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before the wind picked up. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The wind and sand swirled continually the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.
“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Bennet Mater more than once, as if the credit of making a sandstorm were all her own. Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when the following email arrived for Elizabeth:
“MY DEAREST LIZZY,--
“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be imputed to my breathing in too much sand and dust yesterday. My kind friends will not hear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Dr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the matter with me.--Yours, etc.”
“Well, my dear,” said Bennet Pater, when Elizabeth had read the note aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she should die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Squire Bingley, and under your orders.”
“Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of trifling respiratory ailments. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the ferflivver.”
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though the ferflivver was not to be had; camelback was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.
“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a thing, in all this sand and wind! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there.”
“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”
“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to release the ferflivver?”
“No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the ride. The distance is nothing when one has a motive; only twenty miles, and the storm is still in its early stages. I shall be back by dinner.”
It was a dusty but invigorating ride on an animal so well genetically modified to Titan’s harsh climate that it could cover the twenty miles in less than two hours, undeterred by the thick clouds of sand that rendered it completely blind and forced it to rely on Elizabeth’s guidance. The challenge for Elizabeth of interpreting GPS readings and guiding the camel, all the while breathing through a filtration headscarf and attempting not be be unseated by the sandy wind, left her flushed with joyful triumph when at last she reached Netherfield.
She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have ridden twenty miles so early in the day, in such frightful weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in Squire Bingley’s manners there was something better than politeness; there was good humour and kindness. Squire Darcy said very little, and Hernandez Pater nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her.
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The doctor came, and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had developed bronchitis, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere.
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the ferflivver, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the ferflivver to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented.