When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and after ensuring that her filtration headscarf protected her throat and lungs from dust, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Hernandez Pater also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad”; but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half-hour was spent in inspecting the sealant along the edges of the windows, lest any tiny flaws should allow dust or sand into the room; and she removed at his desire to the other side of the room, that she might be further from the windows. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.
When tea was over, Hernandez Pater reminded his paramour’s niece of the card-table—but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Squire Darcy did not wish for cards; and Hernandez Pater soon found even his open petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Hernandez Pater had therefore nothing better to do than to invite Sondakh Mater upstairs for a little early evening dalliance. Miss Bingley watched them leave with a sigh, wondering if co-parental relations would bear any resemblance to paramour love, or whether she would have to wait nearly two decades for such delights.
Miss Bingley turned her attention to an admiration of Darcy’s progress through his book; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with a book of her own, which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I am ensconced in a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library.”
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said:
“By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure.”
“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins—but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing.”
“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day. After all, intelligence and sensibility are more important qualities to look for in a breeding partner than physical grace.”
“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much like a ball. Besides, even the best sets of genes require a healthy body to realize their transmission to the next generation.”
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said:
“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude.”
Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Squire Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere. “What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his meaning?”—and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?
“Not at all,” was her answer; “but depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it.”
Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Squire Darcy in anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives.
“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can assess you much better as I sit by the window.”
“We have nothing to gain by displaying our well-shaped figures to you,” replied Elizabeth. “We all know that you have higher standards for the mother of your future children.”
“I have high standards, yes,” said Darcy. “It would be neglectful of me not to want the best for my children. Especially when I am fortunate enough to be in a position to provide the best.”
Miss Bingley looked dismayed.
“But I am sure that both of you will make excellent mothers,” he concluded with an belated attempt at gallantry.
“Now that you have reminded us of your very privileged position, Squire Darcy, I would like to ask your opinion on a political matter,” said Elizabeth.
“Yes?”
“Do you think it is time for Titan to become a democracy?” 
Darcy considered the question thoughtfully. “Democracy is a beautiful concept,” he said judiciously, “but the realities of life on Titan require a technocracy. The brightest and best educated minds on this planet are already fully occupied in tending to the challenges of making an alien environment hospitable to human life. We would be completely undone if the uneducated masses to were elect a charismatic dunce to direct our operations.” 
“Then education, surely, is the key.”
“Ultimately, yes,” Darcy replied. “Ultimately we would like a genetically healthy, intelligent and well-educated populace that could be trusted with deciding the fate of Titan. But at the moment, we don’t have the resources to provide the necessary education to everyone. We need men to work in the mines and women to raise children.”
“But don’t you think that if women were to devote more of their energy to educating themselves, they would be better able to educate their children, thereby making each successive generation of Titan closer to that ideal that you envision?”
Darcy looked surprised.
“I do think that,” he said. “That is why I think the accomplishments of a good mother should extend far beyond useful skills such as furniture design and human biology, to include an understanding of history, literature, philosophy and science.”
“So you don’t think that women’s accomplishments are solely valuable as a means to display superior genes?”
“No,  in fact, I don’t. That they effectively display superior genes is indisputable, but women also have a role to play in making our society better.”
“Spoken like a true politician.”
“You mistake me. I am not a politician. Due to our freedom from the democratic process here in Titan, we who are entrusted to manage society do not have to be politicians. We may concentrate on being technocrats.”
“And why can’t women be technocrats? At least after they have fulfillled their child-raising duties?”
Darcy smiled. “I am sure that some women could make very competent technocrats,” he said, regarding Elizabeth with warm respect, “Unfortunately for those of your sex with such ambitions, men have the power, and those with power rarely give it up voluntarily.”
“You mean some men have the power. And that privileged few is unlikely to relinquish it.”
“Exactly.”
“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa,” she called to her aunt who had just come down the stairs looking quite invigorated, “you will not mind playing for us?”
Sondakh Mater had not the smallest objection, and the positronic organ was opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.