It was the second week in Quintober, in which the three young lasses set out together from Lizardneck Lane for the town of Bukit Lawang, in Mexistan; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Bennet Pater’s carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite haberdashers, watching the sentinel on guard, and carving a capybara.
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with a capybara dressed with herbs and yams, exclaiming, “Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?”
“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia, “but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then, showing her purchases—”Look here, I have bought this armlet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make I nice pair of anklets out of it.”
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, “Oh! But there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier gold filament to redesign it with, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this clear season, after the Ngaya have left Mexistan, and they are going in a fortnight.”
“Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
“They are going to be undergoing training near Orleans; and I do so want Mamma to take us all there for the cold season! She is going there anyway to visit a paramour, and it would be such a delicious scheme if she were to take us with her; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all! Only think what a miserable cold season else we shall have!”
“Yes,” thought Elizabeth, “that would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Orleans, and a whole campful of astronauts, to us, who have been overset already by one poor aeronautics corps, and the monthly balls of Mandalay!”
“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down at table. “What do you think? It is excellent news—capital news—and about a certain person we all like!”
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said:
“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger of Wickham’s offering a contract to Mary Kwame. There’s for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”
“And Mary Kwame is safe!” added Elizabeth.
“Apparently her father said she was too young for breeding! Have you ever heard of anything more ridiculous!”
“But she is too young,” said Elizabeth seriously. “She is only fifteen.” 
“Only fifteen! I am fifteen,” said Lydia proudly, “And I’m sure my reproductive system is fully mature!” 
“Yes, but Mary Kwame looks even younger,” said Kitty. “I saw her at Nara. She’s just a skinny little freckled thing. Certainly no suitable mother for Wickham’s children!” 
Elizabeth silently reflected how this incident further verified Darcy’s story. She no longer had any doubt as to his veracity.
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, were seated in it.
“How nicely we are all crammed in,” cried Lydia. “Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Did you have any chance to display your nubility? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a breeding contract before you came back. Jane will be getting quite desperate soon, I declare. She is almost six-and-twenty!? She’ll have to start looking for jobs on Ganymede soon! Lord, how worried I should be of not having a contract before six-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to get contracts as quickly as you can. She says Lizzy had better have taken Reverend Collins; but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! How I should like to be a mother before any of you; and then I would have my own house and be the queen of the family. Dear me! We had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Forster Mater promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the bye, Forster Mater and me are such friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne – one of the astronauts, you know – in woman’s clothes on purpose to pass for a lass, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Forster Mater, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Wickham and Santiago, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! How I laughed! I thought I should have died. Only Denny recognized him. He’d seen him dressed up as a lass before, so that wasn’t fair. Apparently astronauts do that quite often when they have a party. I guess they get bored when there are no ladies around!”
With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Liqua. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.
Their reception at home was most kind. Bennet Mater rejoiced to see that Jane’s outward displays of fertility were not diminished by her inward distress; and more than once during dinner did Bennet Pater say voluntarily to Elizabeth:
“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare of her eldest daughter and the progress of her pregnancy; Bennet Mater was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.
“Oh! Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the shutters, and pretended there was nobody in the carriage; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the carriage. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! We talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”
To this Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for me—I should infinitely prefer a book.”
But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Mandalay, and to see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the astronauts. There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Squire Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to her of the corps approaching removal was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go—and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.
She had not been many hours at home before she found an opportunity to confront her father in his den.
“Did you have encounter any trouble at Hanoi,” said her father with concern. “You seemed a bit serious at lunch.”
“There has been something on my mind,” Elizabeth admitted.
“Didn’t they treat you well? Did Lady Catherine look down her nose at you?” “It’s nothing like that,” Elizabeth said, trying to decide how to broach the subject without mentioning Darcy.
“Well what is it then?” said her father encouragingly.
“Only this,” said Elizabeth with determination. “I need to know the truth from you – why do you and my mother have only girl children.”
“Well!” said her father. “What’s put that into your head? Has someone been making enquiries into your suitability as a breeding partner,” her father said with a chuckle.
“How can you laugh!” said Elizabeth, shocked. “How can you be amused at the prospect of your daughters being unable to form breeding contracts because of an inherited genetic defect!”
“Lizzy!” said her father in a gentle voice, surprised at her vehemence and the seriousness of the conclusion she had jumped to. “It is nothing so serious. Nothing that can affect the breeding prospects of my girls.”
“It isn’t?” said Elizabeth, hoping, and yet fearing to hope, that this was true.
“No, not at all! The defect is in me,” said her father. “In my Y chromosome. I can’t father sons, but my daughters are perfectly fine.”
“Oh thank goodness,” said Elizabeth, sitting down in relief. She paused to take in this new information.
“But why have kept this from us?,” she said with a distressed voice, “why not let us know?”
“I didn’t think it of any importance,” said her father. “It doesn’t affect you, you see. You would clear any pre-breeding genetic analysis.”
“But father,” said Elizabeth, “Don’t you realize the cloud of suspicion you have put this family under?”
“Have I?” said Bennet Pater. “Who is suspicious?” 
“Everyone!” said Elizabeth. “Everyone can see that there are no boys in our family and so everyone has reason to think that there is a genetic flaw in our heritage!” 
“But that’s ridiculous,” said her father. “You never suspected before, and you’ve been in this family all of your life.” 
“But I’m not a man looking for a lass to bear his children!” said Elizabeth. “Of course such men think of such things!” 
“I see,” said her father gravely. “Yes, I see. That is a problem.” Bennet Pater pondered.
“I tell you what I’ll do,” he said with sudden inspiration. “I’ll tell Senator Lucas about my broken chromosome. Between him and his gossipy co-parent, the whole Colony of Mexistan will know about it before the end of the week!’
“Yes, that’s a good idea,” said Elizabeth with an attempt at a smile.
“I hope I haven’t inadvertently obstructed the progress of any breeding contracts,” said her father, uncertainly.
“No, don’t, worry about that” said Elizabeth. “There are no breeding contracts in the offing.” She felt that it would be useless to blame her father for his insensibility, but she bitterly reflected on what her father’s thoughtlessness had cost Jane. If only Squire Bingley had known that Jane’s genes were as flawless as Jane herself.