The ladies of Liqua soon called on those of Netherfield. The visit was soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with them was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; even their kindness to Jane, such as it was, arose in all probability from the influence of their brother’s admiration. On the one hand, they could scarcely afford to offend their fraternal protector, and on the other hand, a breeding partner would solidify Squire Bingley’s ties to Titan and reduce the likelihood of his abandoning his sisters to the vagaries of this desperate desert society. It was generally evident whenever they met, that Squire Bingley did admire her and to Elizabeth it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent. Until everything was settled, it behooved Jane to be discreet in her feelings, in case Squire Bingley should unaccountably decide that another woman would make a better mother to his children. As open and artless as Jane was, Elizabeth knew that it would be severely damaging to her future prospects of partnering well if it came to be known that she had loved and been rejected by another man. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.

“It may perhaps be prudent,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark.  There is so much vanity in men, that even when choosing a breeding partner and not a paramour, a man cannot help but to be influenced by a lass’s admiration for himself. And then, of course,” she reflected further, “there is a superstition among men that a breeding partner who is initially in love with them is less likely to stray before the end of her breeding years, possibly incurring an illegitimate conception...”

“Don’t be absurd,” said Elizabeth sharply. “No woman on Titan would dare to stray before the end of her breeding years! If an illegitimate baby were conceived, her infidelity would be detected immediately upon its first prenatal DNA analysis, whereupon she’d be thrown off the Colony and left to her own devices.” Elizabeth shivered. “No one would dare.”

“Yes, of course,” said Charlotte in a conciliatory tone. “We know that and so do they, but it is nevertheless a kind of ancient superstition among them.  There are very few of men who have heart enough to enter into a breeding arrangement without harboring the belief that a woman is truly in love with them. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show more affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never commit to a breeding partnership, if she does not help him on.”

“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not to discover it too.”

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal it, he must find it out.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in question but the desire of being well partnered, and if I were determined to get a breeding partner with a good establishment, or in a desperate plight to attract any breeding partner at all, I dare say I should adopt it. But these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design, and she has many years before desperation sets in. As yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four dances with him at Mandalay; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely dined with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like the blues better than Mozart and dungeons and dragons better than go; that they are both reasonably intelligent but not intellectual, healthy and in possession of good genes, and rather more good-natured than may be wise, but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”

“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she were to enter into a breeding contract with him tomorrow, I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a tenmonth. Happiness in co-parenting arrangements is entirely a matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least. After a short period of blissful cohabitation, she will become entirely immersed in the business of motherhood and he will begin to take paramours. They will continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards that by the time she is eligible to take a paramour of her own, the relationship will have become so detached as to be able to continue in civil cooperation unfettered by passion. Outside the realm of genetics, it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to breed.”

“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”

“Well, you are twenty-two and Jane is twenty-four, and you both exude fecundity. You have the leisure to be romantic and finicky in your choice. I am twenty-seven and rapidly losing what nubility I have ever possessed. I have but three years to find myself a partner and I have already lost one sister to exile. I consider, therefore, that pragmatism is an appropriate principle for me to adopt.”

Occupied in observing Bingley’s attentions to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be nubile; he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardly had a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her nubile enough to dance with.

He was aware that it would be perverse for him to develop a romantic interest in a lass who had not yet bred, and with whom, moreover, he could never consider entering into a breeding partnership. In spite of the faint suspicion that he may be entertaining inappropriate feelings, however, he began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Senator Weiming Lucas’s, where a large party were assembled.

“What does Squire Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my conversation with Colonel Forster?”

“That is a question which Squire Darcy only can answer.”

“But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said:

“Did you not think, Squire Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was importuning Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Mandalay?”

“With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a lass energetic.”

“You are severe on us.”

“It will be her turn soon to be importuned,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”

“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If I had chosen to develop a musical talent as a way advertising the fitness of my genes, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however, she added, “Very well, if it must be so, it must.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the least nubile lass in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, and was always impatient for display. Not being endowed with the shapeliness of her sisters, Mary’s only hope was to attract a man who valued the possibility of intelligent children over the probability of robust ones. After all, although life on Titan was physically demanding, and the prospect of frail children understandably abhored, intelligence was always an advantage. With full understanding of the precariousness of her position even at the tender age of eighteen, she was motivated to work hard at the acquisition of accomplishments that could advertise her less apparent genetic gifts and eagerly seized occasions for demonstrating them.

Squire Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Senator Weiming Lucas was his neighbour, till Senator Lucas thus began:

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Squire Darcy! There is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first refinements of polished society.”

“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.”

Senator Lucas smiled. “Yes, but what better and more pleasing way of discerning the relative genetic endowments of young people! Whether savage or sophisticate, the best dancers must draw on considerable internal resources of intelligence, agility and dexterity. Truly, as they say, good dancers make good parents.”

“Your friend performs delightfully,” he continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Squire Darcy.”

“You saw me dance at Mandalay, I believe, sir.”

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do you often dance at St. James’s?”

“Never, sir.”

“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”

“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“You have a house in the city, I conclude?”

Squire Darcy bowed.

“I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of NeoLondon would agree with Lady Lucas. She is sensitive to the high levels of cadmium there.”

He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her:

“My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Squire Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lass to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to give this young lass a chance to display her nubility.”

And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Squire Darcy who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Senator Lucas:

“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”

Squire Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Senator Lucas at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it would be a shame to miss this opportunity to display your shapeliness and grace to this room of potential fathers; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us for one half-hour.”

“Squire Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.

“He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such a partner?”

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:

“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”

“I should imagine not.”

“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise—the nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”

“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the important role a pair of fine eyes in the face of a nubile lass has in a thorough assessment of genetic quality.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lass had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Squire Darcy replied with great intrepidity:

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment. How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish you joy?”

“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to breeding arrangements, from breeding arrangements to children, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”

“Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is absolutely settled. Your children  will have a charming grandmother, indeed; and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you.”

He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed long.