The day passed much as the day before had done. Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The poker-table, however, did not appear. Squire Darcy was on his laptop, writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Hernandez Pater and Squire Bingley were playing go, and Sondakh Mater was observing their game.
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady, either on his computer, or on the facility of his typing, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in union with her opinion of each.
“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!” He made no answer.
“You type uncommonly fast.”
“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”
“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”
“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.” 
“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”
“I have already told her so once, by your desire.” 
“You have a very elegant laptop.” He was silent.
“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the violin; and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley’s.”
“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have not time to do them justice.”
“Oh! It is of no consequence. I shall see her in Primember. But do you always write such charming long letters to her, Squire Darcy?”
“They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me to determine.” 
“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannot write ill.” 
“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her brother, “because he does not write with ease. He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?” 
“My style of writing is very different from yours.” 
“Oh!” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and misspells the rest.” 
“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them—by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.” 
“Your humility, Squire Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.” 
“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.” 
“And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?” 
“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. You are far too concerned with capturing the imagination of your intimate social circle and rather too little for matters of greater objective significance.” 
“And what, pray, are these significant mattters that my vanity leads me to neglect?” said Bingley, with more curiousity than heat.
“Such things as your duties as a mineowner, the well-being of your fellow man, and the smooth functioning of the Colony.”
“I must be vain indeed to be neglectful of so much!” retorted Bingley with an injured tone.
“On the whole, I would say that you take your duties with adequate seriousness,” Darcy replied. “But when temptation calls, you are over apt to be impetuous and even thoughtless. When you told Bennet Mater this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself—and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitousness which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”
“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitousness merely to show off before the ladies.”
“I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity, even when convinced of the merit of your journey. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on whim as that of any man I know; and if, as you were entering your ferflivver to travel to a conference on mine management, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay till next week,’ you would probably not go—and at another word, might stay a month.”
“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Squire Bingley has an affectionate heart and that he prizes the needs of his friends over the demands of business.”
“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and fly off as fast as I could.”
“Yes,” said Darcy “If you were once of the belief that attending this conference would make you a better manager, thereby benefiting your workers, their families, this town and, by extention, the success of this Colony, then I do think you should maintain your intended course, even in the face of a friend’s importunity.”
“I believe you wrong me here, Darcy” said Bingley, thoughtfully, “If I were convinced of the value of the conference, and yet wished to accede to my friend’s desires, I would commission my under-manager to go in my stead. I am sure that I am not the only man in my mine who could benefit from further industrial education.”
“Well spoken,” returned Elizabeth. “The reasonableness of your solution is a testament to both your modesty and your ability to compromise. Modesty and Compromise, I venture, are concepts with which Darcy has had little acquaintance.”
Squire Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh.
Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received and called for an end to the argument.
“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Squire Darcy had much better finish his letter.”
Squire Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity to the positronic organ; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself.
Sondakh Mater sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Squire Darcy’s eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of consideration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation.
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm with a lively Martian air; and soon afterwards Squire Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her:
“Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?”
She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.
“Oh!” said she, “I heard you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’ that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all—and now despise me if you dare.”
“Indeed I do not dare.”
Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any lass as he was by her. He feared, that were it not for his conscious subjection to the social mores of Titan, he should be in some danger of developing a scandalous attraction to an innocent girl, a lass who has not even began to breed.
Miss Bingley saw or suspected enough to believe that Darcy was considerating Elizabeth’s potential as a co-parent; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed breeding contract, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together the next day in the glade of elephant trees that graced the grounds of Netherfield, “that your children will not take after your partner’s mother, when this desirable event takes place, and do not inherit Jane’s ill-health, or Charlotte’s cough, and miraculously avoid all of the other imperfections that that haunt that unfortunate family.”
“Have you anything else to propose for my paternal felicity?” 
“Oh! Yes! Do try to find out why the happy family consists solely of girls. Very odd, is it not?” 
The oddness of this circumstance had not escaped Darcy’s attention, but, as there was no possibility of his condescending to breed with Elizabeth, he paid no attention to it. Even the inappropriate inclinations that occasionally wormed their way into his consciousness were romantic and not co-parental. 
“They are, however, all remarkably nubile and fecund lasses,” he replied.
At that moment they were met from another walk by Sondakh Mater and Elizabeth herself.
“I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been overheard.
“You used us abominably ill,” answered Sondakh Mater, “running away without telling us that you were coming out.”
Then taking the disengaged arm of Squire Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just admitted three. Squire Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said:
“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue.” 
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered: “No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque? would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye.” 
She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.