With no greater events than these in the Liqua family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the rides to Mandalay, sometimes dirty and sometimes hot, did Primember and Sectober pass away. Tercember was to take Elizabeth to Hanoi. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Reverend Collins. There was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was to accompany Sir Weiming and his third daughter. The improvement of spending a night in NeoLondon was added in time, and the plan became perfect as a plan could be.
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her.
The farewell between herself and Squire Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his appraisal, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be considered as possibly worthy to be the mother of his children; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, there was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that they would be lovers someday when her child-rearing years had passed.
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Senator Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the closh-closh of the camels’ hooves on the rasping sand. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known the Senator’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of his loyal but thoughtless support of government policies; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.
It was a journey of only fifty miles, and they began it so early as to be in Lizardneck Lane by noon. As they drove to Gardiner Pater’s door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to wait in the family room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a tenmonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the afternoon at a camel rodeo.
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Gardiner Mater gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Lizardneck Lane, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the hope of breeding with him.
Gardiner Mater then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so well.
“But my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of lass is Miss Kwame? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”
“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in breeding considerations, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Bacchanalia you were afraid of his contracting with me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a lass with an influential uncle, you want to find out that he is mercenary.”
“If you will only tell me what sort of lass Miss Kwame is, I shall know what to think.” 
“She is a very good kind of lass, I believe. I know no harm of her, though it is said she has little aptitude for domestic accomplishments and is rather childish.” 
“An innate deficiency of mental faculties, no doubt. And he paid her not the smallest attention till her cousin’s death made her object of her uncle’s generous solicitude.” 
“No—why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain my affections because I had no family connections, what occasion could there be for considering a lass whom he did not care about, and who was equally lacking in influence?” 
“It seems cowardly for him to choose to breed with a lass who is unlikely to pass on genes for high intelligence to his children.” 
“A man in distressed circumstances has not leisure to demand all the perfections which other people may require. If he does not object to her qualifications, why should we?” 
“His not objecting does not justify him. It only shows that he lacks confidence in his ability to survive the hazards of an astronaut’s life and to eventually merit a promotion to a safer position.”
“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. He shall be mercenary and a coward.” 
“No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in New Arabia.” 
“Oh! If that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in New Arabia; and their intimate friends who live in Mexistan are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going tomorrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.” 
“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.” 
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the rodeo, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the clear season.
“We have not determined how far it shall carry us,” said Gardiner , “but, perhaps, to the Lakes.”
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “Oh, my dear, dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! What felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are young men to lakes of methane and unexplored caverns that may harbor treasure? Oh! What hours of transport we shall spend! Perhaps we will discover a ruby the size of a saddle horn or a fistful of diamonds! What joy! We could abandon forever the men of Titan and the dreary necessity to breed, purchase a ticket to Earth and discover what freedom is like! And if we are not so lucky as that, at least we will have a couple of weeks together to indulge in pretty fantasies!”