As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their aunt, and all Reverend Collins’s scruples of leaving Bennet Pater and Bennet Mater for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the ferflivver conveyed him and the five lasses at a suitable hour to Mandalay; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Squire Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in the house.
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Reverend Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small saddle room at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Phillips Mater understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor—when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found that the air-conditioner alone had cost eight hundred plats, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the robotic repair workshop.
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her estate, with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Phillips Mater a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who had no appetite for the conversation of the reverend, and who had nothing to do but fan themselves and wish that Phillips Mater could afford air-conditioning, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did approach, and when Squire Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The astronauts of the Ngala Corps were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but Squire Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, who followed them into the room.
Squire Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on the likely intensity and duration of the dusty season, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.
With such rivals for the notice of the nubile as Squire Wickham and the astronauts, Reverend Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young lasses he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Phillips Mater, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with cactus tea and cornbread. It is probable that Phillips Mater was unaware that paramours were proscribed for pastors. When the game-tables were placed, he had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to mahjong.
“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to improve myself.” 
“I would be very happy to help you improve yourself whenever you are free,” said Phillips Mater. “I have a lot of leisure time now that my children are mostly grown,” she added. She was pleased with her own ingenuity in informing Reverend Collins in this subtle manner that she was now sufficiently free from child-rearing duties to be able to take a paramour.
Squire Wickham did not play at mahjong, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of Monopoly, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in buying property and building houses to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Squire Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told—the history of his acquaintance with Squire Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Squire Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Mandalay; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Squire Darcy had been staying there.
“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, “He is a man of very large property in New Arabia, I understand.”
“Yes,” replied Squire Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one with mine interests that clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my infancy.”
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Squire Darcy?”
“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth very warmly. “I have spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very disagreeable.”
“I have no right to give my opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for me to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general astonish—and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else as here you are in your own family.”
“Upon my word, I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Mexistan. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”
“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with him I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”
“I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill-tempered man.” 
Wickham only shook his head.
“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is likely to be in this colony much longer.”
“I do not at all know; but I heard nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the Ngala Corps will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”
“Oh! No—it is not for me to be driven away by Squire Darcy. If he wishes to avoid seeing me, he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding him but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Darcy Pater, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Squire Darcy without reflecting with sadness on how unreliable genes are in transmitting character. His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and everything but his disgracing the pedigree of his father.”
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.
Squire Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Mandalay, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very intelligible gallantry.
“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added, “which was my chief inducement to enter the Ngala. I knew it to be a most respectable, agreeable prospecting corps, and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances Mandalay had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude. I must have employment and society. A life of prospecting and excavation is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The church ought to have been my profession—I was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.”
“Indeed!”
“Yes—the late Darcy Pater promised on his deathbed that his family’s influence would secure me a pastorage. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.” 
“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could that be? How could his family disregard his will?”
“There was just such an informality in the terms of the promise as to give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Squire Darcy chose to doubt it—or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence—in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may have spoken my opinion of him, and to him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me.”
“This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.” 
“Some time or other he will be—but it shall not be by me. Till I can forget his father, I can never defy or expose him.” 
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
“But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? What can have induced him to behave so cruelly?”
“A thorough, determined dislike of me—a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Darcy Pater liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood—the sort of preference which was often given me.’
“I had not thought Squire Darcy so bad as this—though I have never liked him. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this.”
“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “I can hardly be just to him.” 
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable”—but she contented herself with, “and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!” 
“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house, engaged together in the same activities – in camel racing, lizard hunting, and holodeck adventures, we were alternately rivals and allies. The relationship between my father and Darcy Pater began in a professional capacity, but soon evolved into an intimate and confidential friendship, and finally into a love affair that lasted until my father’s death. My father began life in the profession that your father does such credit to, but he gave up everything to be of use to the late Darcy Pater and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property and to the happiness his paramour. Darcy Pater often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father’s loving care, and when, immediately before my father’s death, Darcy Pater gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to him, as of his affection to myself.” 
“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Squire Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no better motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest—for dishonesty I must call it.” 
“It is wonderful,” replied Wickham, “for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride.” 
“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?” 
“Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his employees, and contribute to the development of Titan. Family pride, and filial pride—for he is very proud of what his father was—have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley family, is a powerful motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers.” 
“What sort of lass is Miss Darcy?”
He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother—very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a nubile lass, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death, her home has been NeoLondon, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.”
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying:
“I am astonished at his intimacy with Squire Bingley! How can Squire Bingley, who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Squire Bingley?”
“Not at all.”
“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Squire Darcy is.”
“Probably not; but Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable—allowing something for fortune and figure.”
The mahjong party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table and Reverend Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Phillips Mater. The usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every round; but when Phillips Mater began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged that she would not make herself uneasy.
“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a mahjong-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five silvers any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.”
Squire Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Reverend Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.
“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Reverend Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”
“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were brother and sister; consequently that she is aunt to the present Squire Darcy.”
“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday.”
“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have the protection of a brother of very large fortune, and it is believed that she will breed with her cousin.”
“Breed with her cousin!” Elizabeth could not hide her shock.
“Oh, of course, you don’t know,” explained Wickham quickly. “They are not genetically related. She was adopted as a young girl.”
“Yes, of course,” Elizabeth replied, remembering the story from Reverend Collins. Learning of the understanding between the families made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions and her attempts to flaunt her genetic quality, if he were already destined to father the children of another.
“Reverend Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”
“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked her, even when she was Lewis De Burgh, and that her manners have always been dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derives this reputation partly from the influence of her status and fortune, and partly from the report of her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.”
Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to games, and gave the rest of the lasses their share of Squire Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of Phillips Mater’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of Squire Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Reverend Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of the thrill of having owned both Boardwalk and Park Place and the number of hotels she had purchased; and Reverend Collins in describing the remarkable civility of Phillips Mater, her warmth and solicitousness, had more to say than he could well manage before the cart arrived at Liqua House.