Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Squire Wickham among the cluster of astronauts there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits to accentuate all the signs of her youth, fertility and suitability for motherhood, trusting that she would be able to convince him to share the blessings of parenthood with her. But in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Squire Darcy’s pleasure in the Bingleys’ invitation to the astronauts; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, “I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Squire Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of the reverend, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. Reverend Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, not only fully displayed his unsuitability as a mate (for surely such gracelessness was due to some genetic deficiency or other), but managed to make Elizabeth appear innately deficient as well. The moment of her release from him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an astronaut, and had the refreshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Squire Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to console her:

“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.” 

“Heaven forbid! That would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil.” 

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the respect in which she was regarded by her neighbours in being allowed to stand opposite to Squire Darcy.  They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at first was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance. 

He replied, and was again silent. 

After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:—”It is your turn to say something now, Squire Darcy. I talked about the dance, and you ought to make some sort of remark on the size of the room, or the nubility of the local lasses.” 

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.

“Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls provide a better forum for fertility displays than public ones. But now we may be silent.”

“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?” 

“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.” 

“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?” 

“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.” 

“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. 

“How near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.” 

“I must not decide on my own performance.” 

He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often ride to Mandalay. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, “Squire Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his making friends—whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.” 

“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.” 

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Senator Weiming Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Squire Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.

“I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such fine dancing is not often seen. It is evidence of both your superior genetic legacy and your privileged upbringing. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, which is an even greater testament to her genetic fitness, given that she has not had your degree of social training. I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Squire Darcy:—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lass, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Senator Lucas’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, “Senator Lucas’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.”

“I do not think we were speaking at all. Senator Lucas could not have interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.

“Books—oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.” 

“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.” 

“No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of something else.”

“The present always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said he, with a look of doubt.

“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember having heard, Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its being created.”

“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.

“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?” 

“I hope not.” 

“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.” 

“May I ask to what these questions tend?”

“Merely to the illustration of your character,” said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”

“And what is your success?”

She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

“I can readily believe,” answered he gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”

“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.” 

“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. 

She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree, for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which troubled him even more than Elizabeth’s dislike of him disturbed her.

They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and with an expression of civil disdain accosted her:

“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham! Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Darcy Pater’s property manager. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Squire Darcy’s using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Squire Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Squire Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother thought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the astronauts, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into Mexistan at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”

“His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Darcy Pater’s property manager, and of that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”

“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer. “Excuse my interference—it was kindly meant.”

“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. Having a low social status is no guarantee of inferior genes! I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Squire Darcy.” 

She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness, lifelong security and beautiful babies.

“I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister’s, “what you have learnt about Squire Wickham. But perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Squire Bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Squire Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Squire Wickham has deserved much less attention from Squire Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister’s, Squire Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Squire Darcy’s regard.”

“Squire Bingley does not know Squire Wickham himself?” 

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Mandalay.” 

“This account then is what he has received from Squire Darcy. I am satisfied. But what does he say of the living?” 

“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Squire Darcy more than once, but he believes that the influence was promised to wielded on his behalf only conditionally.” 

“I have not a doubt of Squire Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly; “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Squire Bingley’s defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of both gentlemen as I did before.” 

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Squire Bingley’s assessment of her as a breeding prospect, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Squire Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Reverend Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.

“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”

“You are not going to introduce yourself to Squire Darcy!” 

“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well last Sunday.” 

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Squire Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that Darcy was a heriditary Governor of the Colony and thus above making conversation with common citizens; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to Squire Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Reverend Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus: 

“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest social status in the Colony—provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lass like yourself.” And with a low bow he left her to attack Squire Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. The reverend prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hanoi,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Squire Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Reverend Collins allowed him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Reverend Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and  Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Reverend Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Squire Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Squire Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a parenting contract founded on true respect and supported by ample resources could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley’s sister and aunt. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soon be bred to Squire Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Bennet Mater seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the contract. His being such a charming young man, so superior in genetics and so rich, and living but twenty miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond his sister and aunt were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s having a family with Bingley must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign the burden of securing breeding contracts for her unsettled daughters to the their sister, giving her the freedom at last to devote herself to her paramour, or perhaps seek a new paramour. So many possibilities could now be entertained!  She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Squire Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

“What is Squire Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”

“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Squire Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!”

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Squire Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.

At length, however, Bennet Mater had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold llama meat. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Mary meant her talent to compensate somewhat for her lacklustre appearance, but her performance failed to signal either innate ability or the innate intelligence and determination to learn. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked at his sister and his aunt, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however, imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, “That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young lasses have time to exhibit.”

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

“Musical achievements in young ladies,” said Reverend Collins, “are perhaps overrated as signals of genetic quality and fitness for motherhood. There are certainly other things to be attended to. A mother must be healthy, first and foremost, and intelligent, of course, to produce quality offspring, but she must also be nurturing, patient and kind, and must be knowledgeable of the practical sciences such as nutrition, human biology, medicine, animal husbandry, furniture-making, sewing, etc. We cannot neglect the importance of these duties; nor could I think well of the man who could omit such criteria in his selection of a breeding partner.” And with a bow to Squire Darcy, he concluded his collection of platitudes, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Bennet Pater himself, while his co-parent seriously commended Reverend Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That Squire Darcy, together with his sister and his aunt, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was pestered by Reverend Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lass in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that he had already made a sufficient judgement as to the relative nubility of the various ladies and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Reverend Collins’s conversation to herself.

She was at least free from the offense of Squire Darcy’s further notice; though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Squire Wickham, and rejoiced in it.

The Liqua party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Bennet Mater, had to wait for their ferflivver a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Sondakh Mater and her niece scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Bennet Mater at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of Reverend Collins, who was complimenting Squire Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Bennet Pater, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Squire Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Sondakh Mater or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Bennet Mater was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Liqua, and addressed herself especially to Squire Bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from NeoLondon, whither he was obliged to go on mine business for a short time.

Bennet Mater was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of genetic counseling, contracts, and prenatal regimens, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter contracted to Reverend Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the contract were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Squire Bingley and Netherfield.