Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her email as soon as she possibly could. She had no sooner received it than she printed it out and hurried off with it to the little grotto, where she was least likely to be interrupted. She sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial.
“Lizardneck Lane, Octember 6.
“MY DEAR NIECE,
“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your application; I did not expect it from you. Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am—and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit.
“On the very day of my coming home from Liqua, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Squire Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been. He came to tell Gardiner Pater that he had found out where your sister and  Squire Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left New Arabia only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham’s wickedness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young lass to trust him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to expose to the scrutiny of the world unsavorable affairs connected with his own family. He had put too much value on the dignity of the family name and too little on public justice. He called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavor to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he had another motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than we had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.
“There is a lady, it seems, a  Sima Mater, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large house in Ginza Street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Sima Mater was, he knew, a sometime paramour of Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted. She would not betray her lover, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did know where he was to be found. Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in NeoLondon, and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in Coppervein street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would go, to hush up the affair. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should settle a breeding contract some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a contract, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never been his design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the aeronautics corps, on account of some debts which were very pressing; and in his distress chose to comfort himself in his flight from the demands of honour with the balm of Lydia’s innocent love. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.
“Squire Darcy asked him why he had not formed a contract with your sister at once. Though Bennet Pater was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by breeding with a lass from an influential family. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
“They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of course wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable.
“Every thing being settled between them, Squire Darcy’s next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Lizardneck Lane the evening before I came home. But Gardiner Pater could not be seen, and Squire Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.
“On Saturnsday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
“They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Moonday: as soon as it was, the news was sent off to Liqua. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times, but this is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
“They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lass concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most.
“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand platinums, another thousand in addition to her own settled upon her, and his transfer arranged. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in this; though I doubt whether his reserve, or anybody’s reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair.
“When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in NeoLondon once more when the contract was signed, and all money matters were then to receive the last finish.
“I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house. He was exactly what he had been, when I knew him in Mexistan; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with her behaviour while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter last Watersday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her all the recklessness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness and danger she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.
“Squire Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, came to the lawyer’s office to observe the finalization of the contract. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on Watersday or Thorsday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him. His behavior to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in New Arabia. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and that undoubtedly will improve when he has settled on a breeding partner and can devote himself to the pleasures of a paramour or two. I am convinced that he means to have you as the mother of his children, but he was circumspect and said nothing on the subject.
“Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park and tried a least half of dozen different programs in the holodeck.
“But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour.
“Yours, very sincerely,
“M. GARDINER.”
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Squire Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a lass whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it out of pity, that he was justly outraged by the fact that a family of daughters could all be deemed unfit to breed and doomed to probable exile by the recklessness and criminal naivity of a child of sixteen. Could he be so just, so kind, so rightly moved to pity? It moved her to admiration and made her realization of her personal loss all the more bitter. For there could be no more hope of him still seeking her services as a breeding partner, when such an arrangement must connect him with the man he most abhorred. Every kind of pride must revolt from any connection with Wickham. Squire Darcy had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. She could, perhaps, believe that it was his partiality for her might that roused his pity into action in a way that a recognition of injustice visited upon strangers could not have done. For that there was injustice, Elizabeth had no doubt. But the injustice was not the fault of Darcy, and it was not his obligation to right it. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia’s character and the character of the entire family to him. He had saved them all from the abyss. Oh! How heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him. For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a cause of compassion and honor, he had been able to get the better of himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that respect and mutual approbation subsisted between Squire Darcy and herself.
She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one’s approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham.
“I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear Eliza?” said he, as he joined her.
“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.” Elizabeth’s instinctive politeness conquered her revulsion for this unctuous rogue.
“I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and now we are better.”
“Indeed, we understand each other better now. Are the others coming out?” 
“I do not know. Bennet Mater and Lydia are going in the llama cart to Mandalay. And so, my dear Eliza, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley.” She replied in the affirmative.
“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Fecundia. And you saw the old grandmother, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”
“Yes, she did.”
“And what did she say?”
“That you were gone into the Space Agency, and she was afraid had—not turned out well. At such a distance as that, you know, things are strangely misrepresented.”
“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:
“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”
“Perhaps discussing breeding arrangements with Miss de Bourgh,” said Elizabeth. “It must be something particular, to take him there at this time of year.”
“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Alpaca? I thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had.”
“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”
“And do you like her?”
“Very much.”
“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two, quite filled out, with a nubile, motherly figure. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. She was just a skinny, gawky thing. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will find a suitable breeding partner.”
“I dare say she will; she has got over the most awkward age and now exudes fecundity.” “Did you go by the village of Kryton?”
“I do not recollect that we did.”
“I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place!—Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited me in every respect.”
“How should you have liked making sermons?” 
“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. I would have especially devoted myself to the guidance and comfort of the children of the parish. One ought not to repine;—but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Darwin?” 
“I have heard from authority, which I thought as good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.” 
“You have. Yes, there was something in that; I told you so from the first, you may remember.” 
“I did hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly.” 
“You did! And it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.” 
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with an insincere smile: “Come, Wickham Pater, we are connected now, you know – your children will be my nieces and nephews. Do not let us quarrel about the past, and let us hope that we will have no grounds for conflict in the future.” 
He proffered his hand, but she could not bring herself to take it, due to an irrational but irresistible conviction that the depravity in his soul was a contagion that could be transmitted through touch.