Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Bennet Mater saw her two most deserving daughters formalize contracts that ensured their futures on Titan. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Bingley Mater, and talked of Darcy Mater, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; but, although she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly, she was unquestionably a most devoted grandmother.

Bennet Pater missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a tenmonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and Mandalay relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he purchased a mineshare in a nearby town in New Arabia, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other. Bingley and Jane were happy and affectionate co-parents who remained warmly attached to each other for the rest of their lives, even though, as irredeemably conventional people, they both enjoyed paramours from time to time.

Mary’s character blossomed with the security of knowing that Darcy’s influence would save her from exile even if she were not able to find a breeding partner. She began to read for the pleasure of developing her ideas rather than for the sake of displaying her native intelligence to prospective breeding partners, and she nurtured her latent capacity for free thinking. Within a few years, she became a leading activist for change on Titan. Although her proposal to raise women to full equality in the governance of the Colony was too far ahead of its time to have an immediate effect, her granddaughters benefited from her pioneering agitation. More successful in the short term was her campaign to allow men to have more than one breeding partner, which resulted in the rescue of thousands of lasses from exile. Later in life, she established a school which allowed young mothers to have some respite from their offspring, freeing up some hours of every day for them to devote to social activism, self improvement or the enjoyment of paramours. Mary’s particular duty at the school was to teach the younger generation of Titan to value liberty, democracy and the inherent dignity of every human being.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with Mary. Although not as earnest as Mary by nature, she imbibed the values of her older sister as she gradually discarded those of Lydia, and learned to appreciate the joys of an intellectual life. She eventually became the second breeding partner to one of the teachers at Mary’s school, and raised five progressive children, one of whom became the first woman on Titan’s board of governors.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution. He bore with philosophy the operation which deprived him of his special interest in little girls and became a tolerably affectionate father, though no operation could deprive him of his innate selfishness, unreliability and profligacy. Lydia found motherhood wearisome, but bore five children in ten years, with the happy result that she was free to pursue paramours before she had reached the age of forty. Beautiful, vivacious and living in the frontier Colony of Juno, where men vastly outnumbered women, Lydia found herself much sought after as a paramour, to her profound delight.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s choice of breeding partner; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.
 
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the conclusion of the co-parental contract of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or to her curiosity to see her nephews and nieces; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a co-parent, but also from the visits of her genetically and socially deficient uncle and aunt.

With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into New Arabia, had been the means of uniting them.

Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. Through Elizabeth and Darcy’s example, she came to learn that a man may love his breeding partner as ardently as one loves a paramour, and that even on Titan, co-parents can sometimes achieve an old-fashioned lifelong devotion to each other.
