Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to stables to saddle up her chosen mount, a small white llama with a gentle disposition and fur like velvet, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman on a large black camel heading towards the stable from the west. Fearful of its being Squire Darcy, she was directly retreating, with the thought of walking to the nearby saguaro grove in lieu of a ride. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and urging the camel to a gallup, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Squire Darcy, she moved again towards the stable. He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been riding in the area some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with a slight nod, turned again into the desert, and was soon out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way towards the saguaro grove, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:—

“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.

“Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the interests of either, I had detached Squire Bingley from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Squire Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the son of my father’s most well-beloved paramour, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the prevention of a breeding contract between two young persons, both of whom are undoubtedly capable of finding other suitable partners, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.

“I had not been long in Mexistan, before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the colony as a potential breeding partner. But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I became convinced that he was serious about offering her a contract. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Senator Lucas’s accidental information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their coming to an agreement. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was so marked as to interfere with a cool assessment of her qualifications. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening’s scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If you have not been mistaken here, I must have been in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain—but I will venture to say that my investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My fundamental objections to the breeding arrangement were essentially those which I last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside in my own case, but with the understanding that these objections would be even a greater impediment to Bingley’s happiness than to my own. Squire Bingley is without question fond of your sister. I hope you will not judge him too harshly if I say that his belief in her unique desirability to be his breeding partner stems not only from a rational assessment of her fertility, education and motherly disposition, but from his attraction to her and affection for her. With these heightened emotions operating on Bingley’s simple heart, I feared that even were he to learn of a serious deficiency in your sister’s genes, he might be tempted to overlook it, despite the fact that such a flaw would profoundly undermine his future happiness. Looking at your various relatives, it appears that there are numerous genetic flaws that your sister could have inherited, but the deficiency that would be most grevious would be an inability to bear a son. Any man would be devastated by being deprived of a son and heir, and Bingley, far from being an exception, would suffer more than most. Although I had convinced myself that I would rather have you than have a son, I cannot believe that a similar decision by Bingely, to accept Jane in spite of her genetic flaws, would promote his long-term happiness.  There is nothing in the world Bingley wants more than to have a son. Once he realized the sacrifice that he had made, the resentment that would grow between your sister and Bingley could only embitter their lives.

“There were also other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than it is honourable to both the sense and genetic quality of both. I will only say farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could have led me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.

“The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in NeoLondon. We accordingly went—and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented him from offering her a contract, had it not been seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. He had before believed her to return his affection with sincere regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than on his own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into Mexistan, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, there is not another soul on Titan who would condemn them.

“With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured Squire Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.

“Squire Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who was originally my father’s property manager and latterly his lover; and on George Wickham, who became his godson, my father’s kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at the Colonial University of Titan—most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from his own lack of economy, would have been unable to give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging; he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The vicious propensities—the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his godfather, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Darcy Pater could not have. Here again I shall give you pain—to what degree you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Squire Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character—it adds even another motive.

“My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to Squire Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow—and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of one thousand platinums. His own father did not long survive mine, so great was  his devotion to his paramour, and within half a year from these events, Squire Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand plats would be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Squire Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon settled—he resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand plats. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In NeoLondon I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question—of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances—and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived I know not. But last cold season he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.

“I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken to be tutored at an establishment formed for her in NeoLondon; and last cold season she went with the lady who presided over it, to Mendelsberg; and thither also went Squire Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Yahama Mater, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent to a love affair. She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended escapade, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I wrote to Squire Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Yahama Mater was of course removed from her charge. Squire Wickham’s chief object was unquestionably his perverse desire to despoil youth and innocence (remember that she was only 15!); but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was also a strong inducement. His revenge would have been complete indeed.

“This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Squire Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.

“You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.

“FITZWILLIAM DARCY”