At last word arrived from Gardiner Mater that the contract between Lydia and Wickham had been finalized. A camel cart was sent to meet them at Freyr, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure.
They came. The family were assembled in the family room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of Bennet Mater as the cart drove up to the door; her co-parent looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
Lydia’s voice was heard on the doorstep; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed his new breeding partner; and wished them both joy in anticipation of their fruitfulness.
Their reception from Bennet Pater, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so pleasing, that had his character and history been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the artistry of unregenerate evil. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.
There was no want of discourse. Lydia and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighborhood, with a good humored ease which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.
“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! When I went away, I am sure I had no idea that I would have a breeding partner by the time I had came back again! Though I thought it would be very good fun if I could.”
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, “Oh! Mamma, do the people hereabouts know I already have a breeding partner? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook Waldo Lam in his carriage, so I was determined he should know it, and so I leaned over the side of our cart, and shouted to him, ‘Wickham is going to knock me up!’”
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the dining-room. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, “Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a woman with a co-parenting contract.”
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Phillips Mater, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Wickham Mater” by each of them.
“Well, mamma,” said she, “and what do you think of my co-parent? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Orleans. That is the place to get breeding partners. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go.”
“Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don’t at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”
“Oh, lord! Yes;—there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Fecundia all the dusty season, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will take care to get good dancing partners for them all, and a paramour for you!”
“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get breeding partners for them before the dusty season is over.”
“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not particularly like your way of getting breeding partners.”
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Wickham Pater had received his new assignment before he left NeoLondon, and he was to join his new prospecting corps at the end of a fortnight.
No one but Bennet Mater regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.
Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. Her childishness did evidently please him still, but his eye was apt to wander whenever there were even younger lasses in attendance. A few years and a couple of babies later, and Elizabeth had no doubt Wickham would lose interest in her completely. That he would not remain romantically interested in his co-parent was, of course, as it should be, but the possibility of him being attracted to other young lasses, and not having the moral strength to ignore his attraction, worried Elizabeth. For the sake of other young lasses with whom he was likely to become acquainted, she fervently hoped that fatherhood would mature him.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more lizards at the start of the hunting season, than any body else in the Colony.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth:
“Lizzy, I never gave you an account how our contract was settled, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?”
“Not really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little said on the subject.” 
“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We all met with Gardiner Pater’s lawyer, Mohammad, on Moonday to order him to draw up the contract and he told us that Wickham and I had to undergo genetic screening! Well, Wickham told him that he was willing to waive that requirement in order to expedite the contract. Wickham was so convinced of my flawless genetic profile, you see, that he didn’t even need to confirm it! But the lawyer, dreadful man!, said we could not be legally united without a genetic screening! Well, I was so worried! Wickham may have been confident of my perfection, but how could I be sure! Just imagine if the geneticist had said that we were incompatible! Horrors! We would be tragically parted and never been allowed to raise a family together! But fortunately, everything was fine. The geneticist said we were a perfect match! So, finally, we were cleared to settle the contract at the lawyer’s on Zeusday. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together. Well, Zeusday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would wear his maroon thobe.” “Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you’ll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure NeoLondon was rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the llama cart came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Garibaldi Pater. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to be a witness; and if we were beyond the hour, we would not be able to settle the contract that day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented from going, the contract settlement need not be put off, for Squire Darcy might have done as well.” 
“Squire Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.
“Oh, yes!—he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”
“If it was to be secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”
“Oh! Certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we will ask you no questions.”
“Thank you,” said Lydia, “for if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry.”
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away.
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information. Squire Darcy had been at Gardiner Pater’s lawyer’s office when Lydia’s contract was settled! It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such suspense; and running to the computer, wrote a short email to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it—unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavor to be satisfied with ignorance.”
“Not that I shall, though,” she added to herself, as she finished the letter; “and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out.”
Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;—till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.