Reverend Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society. Although, in order to quality for his profession, he had studied religion, pastoral care and eugenics, he had only learnt sufficient to pass his examinations and had never developed any true understanding. His father had been uneducated and evil-tempered. Collins senior been a tunnel laborer in a copper mine until his early death in a mining accident, succumbing to an all too common fate among the workers of Titan. The early subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but having risen in the world by dint of his own application, that initial humility was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hanoi was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high status, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he needed to find a lass with whom to breed; and in seeking an acquaintance with the Liqua family he had a breeding partner in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as fecund and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends—of atonement—for being granted their father’s estate upon his death; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s motherly figure confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening she was his settled choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour’s tete-a-tete with Bennet Mater before breakfast, a conversation about his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that he might find a breeding partner at Liqua, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to her younger daughters, she could not take it upon her to say—she could not positively answer—but she did not know of any prepossession; her eldest daughter, she must just mention—she felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon to be offered a contract.”

Reverend Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth—and it was soon done—while Bennet Mater was preparing lunch. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and nubility, succeeded her of course.

Bennet Mater treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters with settled contracts; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in her good graces.

Lydia’s intention of riding to Mandalay was not forgotten, and as the sky was unseasonably clear, it was an attractive plan; every sister except Mary agreed to go with her; and Reverend Collins was to attend them, at the request of Bennet Pater, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his den to himself; for thither Reverend Collins had followed him after breakfast; his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Reverend Collins to join his daughters in their ride; and Reverend Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a rider than a reader, was extremely pleased to go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of the Bennet sisters, their time passed till they entered Mandalay. They tied up their llamas, took off their riding robes and strolled down the street in their gay sarongs. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by Reverend Collins. Their eyes were immediately wandering up and down in quest of the astronauts, and nothing less than a beautiful silken sash, or a jewel-encrusted water flask in a shop window, could recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another astronaut on the other side of the way. The astronaut was the very Squire Denny concerning whose return from NeoLondon Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger’s air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Squire Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to introduce his friend, Squire Wickham, who had returned with him the day before from NeoLondon, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in the Aeronautics Corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only a high ranking position to make him completely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, an aura of prosperity and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation—a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of camels drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Liqua on purpose to inquire after her. Squire Darcy corroborated it with a bow of his head, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Squire Wickham, after a few moments, touched his headdress—a salutation which Squire Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.

In another minute, Squire Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.

Squire Denny and Squire Wickham walked with the young lasses to the door of Phillip Mater’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of Phillips Mater’s throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation.

Phillips Mater was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, when her civility was claimed towards Reverend Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his acquaintance with the young lasses who introduced him to her notice. Phillips Mater was quite awed by such an excess of good manners; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Squire Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s commission in the Aeronautics Corp. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Squire Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the astronauts, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her co-parent call on Squire Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Liqua would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Phillips Mater protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of monopoly, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Reverend Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.

As they rode home under the bright desert stars, their robes wrapped tight against the stinging chill in the air, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.

Reverend Collins on his return highly gratified Bennet Mater by admiring Phillips Mater’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life.