Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention it, when Senator Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to announce the proposed contract to the family. With joy and relief, he reported the means of his daughter’s deliverance from exile—to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for Bennet Mater, with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:
“Good Lord! Senator Lucas, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know that Reverend Collins wants to breed with Lizzy?”
Nothing less than the discipline of diplomat could have borne without anger such treatment; but Senator Lucas’s training carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.
Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters by the earnestness of her congratulations to Senator Lucas, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the high quality of offspring that might be expected from the match, the excellent character of Reverend Collins, and the convenient distance of Hanoi from NeoLondon.
Bennet Mater was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Senator Lucas remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Reverend Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would not be genetically compatible; and fourthly, that the agreement might be annulled after genetic counseling. Two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could console and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out her resentment. How could Elizabeth be so careless of her own life and future when her mother thought of nothing else! A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Senator and Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter.
Bennet Pater’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it amused him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably brave, would sell herself so cheaply just to secure a living on this godforsaken colony. What a price to pay for such a tawdry prize!
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the proposed contract; but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire that Reverend Collins’s offspring would avoid the worst deficiencies of their sire. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Reverend Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Mandalay.
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to report to Bennet Mater on the comfort of having a daughter well settled; and she called at Liqua rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Bennet Mater’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away.
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth feared that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. She could not blame Charlotte for making such a choice, but whenever she looked at Charlotte, she feared that she was looking into her own future. She told herself, with reluctant immodesty, that she was more nubile and more motherly than Charlotte, and that she was sure to receive a more attractive offer than that of Reverend Collins. This would just begin to console her, when she would reflect that she was already twenty-two and had never received any other offer than that the one that she had just refused. Already perhaps past her best years, she could scarcely be confident of a better opportunity arising. Even Charlotte’s dismal lot might in the end be superior to her own. Her pity for Charlotte made her turn with greater concern to her sister, for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of his return.
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her email, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. An email from Reverend Collins arrived on Zeusday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a tenmonth’s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained breeding rights to their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of making birthing plans that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Liqua, whither he hoped to be able to return on Moonday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved of their parenting contract, that she wished it to be concluded as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to make him the happiest of fathers as soon as possible.
Reverend Collins’s return into Mexistan was no longer a matter of pleasure to Bennet Mater. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her co-parent. It was very strange that he should come to Liqua instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and prospective parents were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Bennet Mater, and they gave way only to the greater distress of Squire Bingley’s continued absence.
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in Mandalay of his coming no more to Netherfield the whole dusty season; a report which highly incensed Bennet Mater, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood.
Even Elizabeth began to fear—not that Bingley had changed his opinion—but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane’s happiness, she could not prevent its frequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the sterling qualifications of Miss Darcy might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his assessment of Jane.
As for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than Elizabeth’s, but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come back she would think herself very ill used. It needed all Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.
Reverend Collins returned most punctually on Moonday fortnight, but his reception at Liqua was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and luckily for the others, the business of birth planning relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Liqua only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
Bennet Mater was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the contract threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Reverend Collins, was convinced that they were talking of the Liqua estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Bennet Pater were dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her co-parent.
“Indeed, Bennet Pater,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be resident of this house, that I should be forced to make way for her, and live to see her take her place in it!”
“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor. A pastor, after all, has to visit mines on a regular basis, exposing himself to all manner of carcinogenic particles, respiratory ailments and the possibility of mining accidents. He may not live long enough to take residence of Liqua.”
This was not very consoling to Bennet Mater.
“It doesn’t matter if he outlives you or not. When you are dead, the church will grant the residence to someone and we will left homeless. If only we could have had a son!”
“If only daughters could inherit!” added Bennet Pater.
“How anyone could have the conscience to take away an estate from a man’s co-parent and daughters, I cannot understand; and given to the church! Why should they have it more than anybody else?”
“Because in exchange they ensure our eternal residence in the house of God!” said Bennet Pater, with an irony that was entirely unappreciated by his co-parent.
“Oh, I understand why you don’t care,” said Bennet Mater. “You’ll be dead.”