Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane while Charlotte and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door. She thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, but when she closed up the computer, and opened the door, to her very great surprise, Squire Darcy, and Squire Darcy only, entered the room.
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were to be within.
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollecting when she had seen him last in Mexistan, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed:
“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Squire Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Squire Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left NeoLondon?”
“Perfectly so, I thank you.”
She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause added: “Squire Bingley does not spend much time in Netherfield.” 
“It is true that he does not need to stay at Netherfield very often. He has capable supervisors to keep him abreast of the workings of the mine, and he is understandably much engaged in his pursuit of a breeding partner, given the requirements of the law.” 
Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.
He took the hint, and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Reverend Collins first came to Hanoi.”
“I believe she did—and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object.”
“Reverend Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a co-parent.” 
“Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few well-bred women who would have accepted him. My friend has an excellent understanding—though I am not certain that I consider her contracting to Reverend Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems content, however, and in a prudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.” 
“It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own family and friends.” 
“An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly three hundred miles.?” 
“And what is three hundred miles in good weather? A few hours by ferflivver. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.” 
“The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case here. Reverend Collins has a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys—and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her family under less than half the present distance.” 
“At least she has secured her right to stay on the same planet as her family,” responded Squire Darcy.
Elizabeth looked surprised. It was not politic of Squire Darcy to allude to the desperation of circumstances that had led Charlotte to accept Reverend Collins.
The gentleman experienced some discomfort; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:
“Are you pleased with Darwin?”
A short dialogue on the subject of the central colony ensued, on either side calm and concise—and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from their ride. The tete-a-tete surprised them. Squire Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went away.
“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone. “My dear, Eliza, he must be assessing you, or he would never have called us in this familiar way.”
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. Camel racing season was over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and, of course, the holodeck, but even a holodeck, they ventured doubtfully, may become dull over time; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the ride to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of riding thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society and an evident admiration of Elizabeth. As Colonel Fitzwilliam was a mature man and a father, Elizabeth was flattered by this admiration. Since he clearly could not be considering her as a breeding partner, and she was far too young to excite his interest as a paramour, she deduced that he simply enjoyed her conversation.
But why Squire Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice—a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Charlotte knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and she would liked to have believed this change the effect of his attention being focused on the assessment of Elizabeth as a breeding partner. She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hanoi; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his considering her qualifications, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Catherine did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment. For she was certain that even Elizabeth could overlook her dislike of Darcy if she were offered the opportunity to give birth to the future heir of Rosings.
Colonel Fitzwilliam’s attentions to Elizabeth worried Charlotte more, however. It was not natural that a mature man with a breeding partner should look so fondly upon a young lass. She was reluctant, however, to instill suspicion into Elizabeth’s heart or to risk slandering a respectable man and relative of Lady Catherine, so she said nothing.