Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding an email from Jane on their first arrival at Alpaca; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two emails from her at once, one of which had been delayed by a systems error.

They had just been preparing to walk as the emails arrived; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one that had been delayed must first be attended to, having been written two days prior. It had been written in evident agitation and was to this effect:

“Dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you—be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An email came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to NeoLondon with one of his astronauts; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected,as Lydia confided in her that Wickham wished her to run off with him to meet with a geneticist and then settle a breeding contract with him. I am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood. That he has an unnatural fondness for young girls now appears to be undeniable, but this perversity will not necessarily make him a bad father or unsuitable co-parent. Although her family has little to offer, Lydia is a well-grown girl who is certainly capable of bearing him healthy young, so I doubt anyone will suspect anything untoward in their match. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturnsday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his co-parent, informing her of their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I, am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this email instantly opened the other with the utmost impatience, and read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried message; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as a breeding contract between Squire Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has been settled, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to NeoLondon. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Orleans the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s short letter to Foster Mater gave them to understand that they were going to consult a geneticist, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that Wickham never intended to do that, or to contract with Lydia at all, which was repeated to Colonel Forster, who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from Orleans intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Silverstone, but no further. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the NeoLondon road. I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that side of NeoLondon, Colonel Forster came on into Mexistan, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Isis and Artemis, but without any success—no such people had been seen to pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Liqua, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and Forster Mater, but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. It is inconceivable that Wickham’s plan could consist only of seducing Lydia and then abandoning her to a hopeless future; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia’s connections, which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel Forster is not disposed to depend upon their contract; he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared Wickham was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be better; but this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed their plans; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of the former. My father is going to NeoLondon with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Orleans again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my uncle’s advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”

“Oh! Where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she opened the door, she saw Squire Darcy just approaching. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Gardiner Pater this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.”

“Good God! What is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, “You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself. Let me go after Gardiner Pater for you.”

“But I don’t know where he’s gone,” answered Elizabeth.

“Then there’s no use for you to be chasing around blindly for him,” said Squire Darcy. “You’d better wait here for him to come back.”

Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. “I suppose they will return soon,” she concluded reluctantly.

She sat down, unable to support herself, and looked so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, “Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”

“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from Liqua.”

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My younger sister has left all her friends—has run off with an astronaut; in fact, she has thrown herself into the power of—of Squire Wickham. They are gone off together from Orleans. You know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can restrain him from—she is lost for ever.”

Darcy was fixed in astonishment. “When I consider,” she added in a yet more agitated voice, “that I might have prevented it! I, who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only—some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all—all too late now.”

“I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved—shocked. But is it certain—absolutely certain?”

“Oh, yes! They left Orleans together on Sunday night, and were traced almost to NeoLondon, but not beyond; there is no news from her of any legal arrangements.”

“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?” “My father is gone to NeoLondon, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s immediate assistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But nothing can be done—I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!” Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

“When my eyes were opened to his real character—Oh! Had I known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not—I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. She should have rejoiced that he had mastered his unseemly passion, but the effect on her was quite to the contrary. She found that she was sorry to see this passion die, unseemly though it was. She realized, with distress, that her respect for propriety had not prevented her from growing attached to his affection for her. In short, she became aware as she never had before that she longed for him to love her, against her own will she longed for it, though she knew it to be wrong, and the very circumstance that made her acknowledge this desire also necessitated that this desire must be in vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia—the humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, “I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”

“Oh, yes. Be so kind as to apologise for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.”

He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious, parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in New Arabia; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

She saw him go with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business. That Lydia was ruined she could not doubt. At sixteen years of age, Lydia legally had another fourteen years to find a breeding partner before she would be exiled from Titan, but with such a scandal in her past, it would be all but impossible for her to find anyone who would be willing to contract with her. Moreover, as Darcy’s change of countenance had brought home to Elizabeth, Lydia’s sisters would also be tainted by the scandal. Who would want to mix their genes with those of a family capable of engendering such foolishness? One after another, beginning with Jane, they would be thrown off Titan for failing to find a mate. Poor innocent Jane would suffer for Lydia’s folly. The injustice burned in Elizabeth’s heart. I will not let Jane go alone, she thought with determination. We will leave together when Jane is thirty, and together we will face the wild frontier of Callisto or Ganymede, doing whatever we have to do to get by. Jane could never survive such an ordeal by herself, Elizabeth thought, but the two of them together could make some kind of life. Bitterly she thought that by the time Lydia suffered the punishment of her actions and was forced to leave Titan, she and Jane would have had almost ten years to establish a home and a way of life in their new situation. And Lydia, spoiled her whole life, and now despoiled, and presently the spoiler of all her sisters’ opportunities for happiness, would suffer the least from her own actions, for by the time she was exiled, her sisters would all be waiting for her. And in spite of her present anger, Elizabeth knew that after fourteen years had passed, she and Jane would welcome Lydia into their purgatory with all the warmth and comfort they could muster.

She put these morbid daydreams aside and turned her thoughts to the immediate situation at home. She was wild to be there with Jane—to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. The Gardiners had hurried back in alarm, having met Darcy on the road and told of her desperate need for their assistance. Elizabeth eagerly communicated the cause of her distress, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy.— Though Lydia had never been a favourite with them, Gardiner Pater and Gardiner Mater perceived immediately that not Lydia alone, but all were concerned in the ensuing disgrace; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Gardiner Pater promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as soon as possible.

Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Alpaca, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Gardiner Pater meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the camel cart, and on the road to Liqua.