Bennet Pater had very often wished before this period of his life that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his co-parent, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most wicked young men in Titan to breed with her might then have rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that the rescue of his entire family from shame should be forwarded at the sole expense of his co-parent’s brother, and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When first Bennet Pater had begun a family with Bennet Mater, economy was held to be perfectly useless. Of course, they knew they were never to have a son, but they were confident of having healthy daughters who would have no difficulty in landing advantageous breeding contracts. Five daughters successively entered the world, and each was more beautiful than the last. Even Mary was a delightful baby. By the time he realized that his younger daughters had only good health to recommend them (and Kitty’s cough was a concern even on that score), he had such faith in his two older children as to alleviate all of his concern. He could not doubt that they would find influential men to breed with and thus save the family from ruin. It never occurred to him that one of his less worthy daughters would bring a scandal to the family that would put all of them in jeopardy.  The threat of absolute ruin was now averted, but a debt of honour now took its place.

Due to a combination of his lack of professional ambition and his economic ineptitude, Bennet Pater had saved only five thousand platinums over the previous twenty-seven years.  This sum would have to somehow suffice for the dowrys of his five daughters. This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Bennet Pater could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered in an email his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to breed with his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten plats a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His email was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his co-parent’s brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.

The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. It was soon acknowledged by formerly suspicious townspeople that Wickham’s apparent interest in young girls was motivated only by his search for a youthful breeding partner.

It was a fortnight since Bennet Mater had been outside of her bedroom or the kitchen; but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph. A breeding contract for her daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was fifteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on the matters attendant on setting up a household for her daughter and her grandchildren. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for them, and, without knowing or considering what Wickham’s income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance.

“Ziva Park might do,” said she, “if the Lams could quit it—or the great house at Swarna, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashanti is too far off! I could not bear to have her fifty miles from me; and as for Galen Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

Her co-parent interrupted her: “Bennet Mater, before you take any or all of these houses for Wickham and your daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into one house in this neighborhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receiving them at Liqua.”

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Bennet Pater was firm. It soon led to another; and Bennet Mater found, with amazement and horror, that her co-parent would not advance a silver to buy baby things for his daughter’s first born. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion. Bennet Mater could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse to help his daughter with the necessities of caring for a newborn exceeded all that she could possibly believe. She was more alive to the disgrace which the want of suitable clothes must reflect on her daughter’s offspring, than to any sense of shame at her absconding and living with Wickham a fortnight before a contract was arranged.

Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make Squire Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since the conclusion of a breeding contract would so shortly give the proper termination to the escapade, they might hope to conceal its unfavorable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s frailty would have mortified her so much—not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia’s contract been concluded on the most honorable terms, it was not to be supposed that Squire Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly abhorred.

From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in New Arabia, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She forgave him for his confusion between romantic love and paramour love, and even become convinced that, if he had been able to transform his ardour into respectable affection and regard, they could have happily raised a family together.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the offer which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now have given her such sincere gratification as to tempt her to overlook its scandalous nature!

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would have been the perfect co-parent for her if he had not complicated the possibility of their breeding with his unruly emotions. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance. The children of such a union would have inherited the best of both sets of genes and been raised in an environment respectively enriched by their complementary characters.

But no such happy arrangement could now teach the admiring multitude what good breeding really was. A union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were coerced into a breeding arrangement only to avoid scandal, she could easily conjecture.

Gardiner Pater soon wrote again to his sister’s co-parent. To Bennet Pater’s acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was to inform them that Squire Wickham had resolved on quitting the Ngala Corps and requesting a transfer to the eastern frontier colony of Juno.

“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as their contract was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece’s. It is Squire Wickham’s intention to apply to the Lakota Corps; they recently suffered a devastating accident that resulted in the deaths of 25 astronauts, including several officers. They are desperate for a few brave recruits, and, whatever his faults, Wickham has never lacked for courage. It is an advantage to have them settle so far from Mexistan. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Squire Wickham in and near Orleans, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Mandalay of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Mohammad has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his new prospecting corps, unless they are first invited to Liqua; and I understand from Gardiner Mater, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the East. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.—Yours, etc.,

“E. GARDINER.”

Bennet Pater and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s removal from the Ngala as clearly as Gardiner Pater could do. But Bennet Mater was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in the East, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Mexistan, was a severe disappointment. She was also concerned about Wickham’s joining such a dangerous mission. “What if he is killed like those other astronauts?” she protested. “Who would provide for Lydia and her babies then?”

Bennet Pater admitted the danger but merely said that she would have to bear the risk. “She’s been remarkably fortunately so far in avoiding the consequences of her recklessness. Perhaps her luck will hold out,” he said dryly.

Bennet Mater wept and called him a hard man, but Bennet Pater refused to be drawn into speculations regarding a hypothetical tragedy.

His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again before she set off for the East, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed before her departure by her parents, urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and Wickham at Liqua, as soon as their contract was settled, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show off her daughter and her new breeding partner in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the East. When Bennet Pater wrote again to Gardiner Pater, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was determined, that as soon as the contract was settled, they should proceed to Liqua. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.