Senator Lucas stayed only a week at Hanoi, but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a breeding partner and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Senator Lucas was with them, Reverend Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in his llama cart, and introducing him to the surrounding parishioners; but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of the reverend by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at tending the llamas or in reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own den, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the family room for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Reverend Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own den, had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement which allowed them the opportunity to talk privately.

“How is your journey to maternity progressing?” Elizabeth asked Charlotte one morning.

“Oh, it has been a trial!” said Charlotte with a sigh. “But I may have some good news.”

 “Have you conceived?”

“Yes, I have, tentatively, at least.”

“Tentatively?”

“Well it’s only a month in, and the first few months are hazardous. Many embryos don’t make it. And then, of course, at three months we must do a genetic analysis and make sure that there are no defects.”

“Yes, I see. Then I tentatively congratulate you.”

“Thank you. At least I am relieved for now of the duty of trying to conceive.” 

“Has it been very hard?” Elizabeth questioned gently, trying not to picture the relevant activities.

“It has been hard,” Charlotte blushed slightly. “I know young lasses like us are not supposed to enjoy the procedure, but I have heard that some breeding partners make it quite tolerable and even quite exciting.”

“The reverend is perhaps not so experienced,” Elizabeth ventured.

“No, I believe he is not experienced at all,” Charlotte responded. “Pastors are not supposed to have paramours, you know.”

“Yes, of course. That would make it doubly difficult for you. But he clearly can perform, since you have conceived.”

“Oh yes, he can do it,” Charlotte answered. “He may not be skillful, but he is enthusiastic – a little overly enthusiastic, perhaps.”

Elizabeth regarded her friend with pity.

“Older women say that paramour love-making is heavenly,” Elizabeth remarked. “You will have your reward in time, I suppose. But hold on – are pastors’ co-parents allowed to have paramours?”

“Yes, of course, you silly goose. I may be contracted to the reverend, but he doesn’t own me.”

“He just has a claim on a couple decades of your life!” responded Elizabeth with some heat, thinking once again of the injustice of the current society.

“True, but think,” said Charlotte in a conspiratoral voice, “in twenty years, Reverend Collins will be celibate again and I will be free to taste all the pleasures of romance.”

Two decades seemed to Elizabeth a very long time to be sacrificed to the service of the reverend and his progeny, but she was gratified that Charlotte could console herself with these pretty thoughts, and for the sake of Charlotte’s dignity and her own composure, she turned the conversation to less distressing topics.

In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. The Festival of Fertility was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Squire Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Reverend Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hanoi Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and upon seeing his ferflivver descending into the Park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Squire Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle Lord Fitzwilliam, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Reverend Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her room, crossing the road, and immediately told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:

“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Squire Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me.”

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Squire Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in Mexistan, paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Collins Mater, and whatever might be his feelings toward her friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and grounds to Collins Mater, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the well-being of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment’s pause, added:

“My eldest sister has been in NeoLondon these three months. Have you never happened to see her there?”

She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.