At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Squire Bingley’s, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a respiratory infection, how excessively they disliked being ill and how lucky they were that they were so rarely ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Squire Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Hernandez Pater, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink and make love to Sondakh Mater.
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she had no conversation, no style and very deficient secondary sexual characteristics. Sondakh Mater thought the same, and added:
“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent rider. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.”
“She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must she be scampering about the desert, because her sister had bronchitis? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!”
“Yes, and her sari; I hope you saw her sari, the silk grazed and ripped from the assault of the sand; and the robes which had been supposed to protect it not doing their office.”
“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning. Her sand-scarred sari quite escaped my notice.”
“You observed it, Squire Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see your sister make such an exhibition.”
“Certainly not.”
“To  ride ten miles, or fifteen miles, or twenty miles, or whatever it is, through a sandstorm, quite alone! What could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, an ill-bred indifference to decorum.”
“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said Bingley.
“I am afraid, Squire Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, “that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.”
“Not at all,” he replied; “they were brightened by the exercise.” A short pause followed this speech, and Sondakh Mater began again:
“I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very sweet lass, though I hope her health is not always so delicate. I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such unhealthy connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it.”
“I think I have heard you say that she has a cousin with flat feet.” 
“Yes; and they have another, with asthma.”
“That is capital,” added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
“If they had enough sickly cousins to fill a hospital,” cried Bingley, “it would not make them one jot less fit.”
“But it must very materially lessen their chance of forming breeding contracts with any men of consideration in the world,” replied Darcy. “They may exhibit a phenotype of good health, but what deleterious recessive genes may be lurking in their genotypes?”
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend’s imperfect relations.
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole party at poker, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing for high stakes she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Hernandez Pater looked at her with astonishment.
“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.” 
“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.” 
“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I am not a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.” 
“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well.” Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others—all that his library afforded.
“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into.”
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Squire Darcy!”
“It ought to be good,” he replied, “it has been the work of many generations.” 
“It is a charming, but peculiar, object for a family collection,” she continued. “It is so much more convenient to read on a computer. And it is not as though you need to conserve battery cells!” 
“I prefer reading real books. The leather and pulp transport me to an earlier, more authentic age.” 
Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Squire Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.
“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the clear season?” said Miss Bingley; “will she be as tall as I am?”
“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or somewhat taller, and rather well-developed too.”
“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such a shapely body, such manners! And so extremely accomplished for her age! Her performance on the violin is exquisite.”
“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young lasses can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are.”
“All young lasses accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?” 
“Yes, all of them, I think. They all build furniture, breed chickens, and grow herbs. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.”
 “Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has too much truth. The word is applied to many a potential breeding partner who deserves it no otherwise than by building a chair or seasoning a dish. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of lasses in general. I cannot boast of knowing no more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really accomplished.” 
“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.
“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished candidate for motherhood.”
“Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.”
“Oh! Certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really be qualified for motherhood who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, and dancing,  and an understanding of theoretical physics and practical biology to deserve the word; and besides all this, she must possess the physical grace and verbal eloquence that emerge naturally from good health and intelligence, or the word will be but half-deserved.”
“All this she must possess,” added Darcy, “and to all this she must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.”
“I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six women qualified to breed. I rather wonder now at your knowing any.”
“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?” 
“I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe united.” 
Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Hernandez Pater called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
“Elizabeth Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is one of those young lasses who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”
“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, “there is a meanness in all the arts which lasses sometimes condescend to employ for the purpose of capturing a breeding contract. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.”
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Dr. Jones being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no local advice could be of any service, recommended an express to NeoLondon for one of the most eminent physicians. Privately they hoped that a specialist would be able to enlighten them as to whether the present illness of Miss Bennet could have a genetic component. Jane would not hear of allowing such an extravagence; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled that Dr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by paying every attention to the sick lass and her sister.