After a week spent in discussing baby names and planning the nursery, Reverend Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturnsday. The only business left was a visit to the genetic counselor to ensure the compatibility of their DNA and the way would be cleared for the reverend to become the happiest of fathers. He took leave of his relations at Liqua with as much solemnity as before; wished the young Bennets good fortune in their pursuit of advantageous contracts, and promised their father another letter of thanks.
On the following Moonday,  Bennet Mater had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his co-parent, who came as usual to spend the Bacchanalia at Liqua. Gardiner Pater  was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, though plagued with asthma, and otherwise greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man cursed with a genetic defect, could nevertheless have been so cultured and agreeable. Gardiner Mater, who was several years younger than Bennet Mater and Phillips Mater, was an amiable, intelligent woman, though flat-chested with pale lips and lacklustre skin. She was a great favourite with all her Liqua nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town.
The first part of Gardiner Mater’s business on her arrival was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Bennet Mater had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had almost been offered breeding contracts, and after all there was nothing in it.
“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have contracted to Squire Bingley if she could have. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to think that she might have been Reverend Collins’s breeding partner by this time, had it not been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter settled securely on Titan while I must still fret and worry. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, of llama-wool robes lined with silk.”
Gardiner Mater, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made Bennet Mater a slight answer, and, in compassion to her co-parent’s nieces, turned the conversation.
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as you describe Squire Bingley, so easily is convinced of the suitability of a nubile lass for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.”
“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth, “but it will not do for us. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent means to think no more of a lass, who, only a few days prior, had impressed him as the perfect mother of his children.”
“But that expression of ‘the perfect mother’ is so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as often applied to an impression which arise from a half-hour’s acquaintance, as to a real, solid assessment. Pray, how convinced was Squire Bingley of Jane’s ‘perfection’?”
“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other prospects, and wholly engrossed by her displays of fertility. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three lasses, by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be finer indications? Is not general blindness to other candidates the sure sign of a decided mind?”
“Oh, yes!—of that kind of decision which I suppose him to have made. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to you, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service—and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything.”
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister’s ready acquiescence.
“I hope,” added Gardiner Mater, “that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.”
“And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Squire Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of NeoLondon! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Squire Darcy may perhaps have heard of such a place as Lizardneck Lane, but he would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Squire Bingley never stirs without him.”
“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane correspond with his sister? She will not be able to help calling.”
“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”
But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his regard might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s nubility and motherliness.
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she hoped by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him.
The Gardiners stayed a week at Liqua; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and the astronauts, there was not a day without its engagement. Bennet Mater had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and his co-parent, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the astronauts always made part of it—of which astronauts Squire Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions, Gardiner Mater, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing Elizabeth, from what she saw, to be very seriously infatuated with Squire Wickham, his positive assessment of her, and her fondness for him, was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left Mexistan, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.
To Gardiner Mater, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her breeding contract, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of New Arabia to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintances in common; and Wickham was able to fill her in on the sort of gossip that isn’t generally conveyed in emails. She learned that Rubenstein Mater was now violently in love with Wang Pater. After five years together, they still had no interest in any other paramours. Taylor Mater, on the other hand, was merrily hopping from paramour to paramour, leaving a trail of broken hearts behind her. Simpson Mater and Faisel Pater had a ten year history of intermittant romance, interspersed with many outside dalliances, while her old friends Rosselli Mater and McFersun Mater had forgone men altogether and were in love with each other. Wickham also mentioned that a certain Gomez Pater, with whom Gardiner Mater had once been deeply infatuated, was currently unattached. Gardiner Mater listened with rapt attention.
Wickham’s conversation turned to Pemberley. Gardiner Mater had seen Pemberley, and known the late Darcy Pater by character perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with Squire Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman’s reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and was confident at last that she recollected having heard Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.