Bingley brought Darcy with him again to Liqua a few days after Lady Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Bennet Mater had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Bennet Mater was not in the habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps he was doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was high, she immediately said:

“Squire Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister, and hence to all of us. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Gardiner Mater was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them.”

“If you will thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might have added force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of you.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last Quadrember, tell me so at once. My affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak –

“My feelings are not what they were – I must admit they have undergone a profound change,” she said slowly. “Where I was once blinded by the most perverse prejudice and under the sway of the most unjust intelligence concerning your history, I now see with clarity the rare nobility of your character. Indeed, I have come to esteem your integrity, your intelligence and your kindness...” She spoke with difficulty and embarrassment. “In fact, I have come to care for you deeply and even tenderly.”

Joy and gratification kindled tentatively in Darcy’s breast, but there was a reserve in her tone that prevented him from giving way entirely to hope.

“That is why,” she continued, “I sincerely hope that you will soon be delivered of your unhealthy infatuation.”

“Unhealthy!” he retorted sharply, overcome with mortification and angry at the hope that had warmed him a moment before. “And how is this infatuation unhealthy?”

Her courage quailed at the sound of his anger, but she spoke in a steady voice, “Please Squire Darcy,” she said, “Give me the benefit of a fair hearing. I don’t wish to injure you, but I feel I must do my best to explain. My understanding of the nature of the relationship between men and women has undergone some maturation since we last talked together last year. I have how come to believe that you spoke the simple truth when you said that it was not uncommon for a man to be attracted to a lass, and to take pleasure in the prospect of breeding with her. I see now that that is a normal consequence of our animal nature.”

“It is not as an animal that I love you,” Darcy interjected hotly.

“Let me continue,” said Elizabeth. “These notions are difficult to express. I believe that attraction is not unnatural,” she repeated, “And in observing Bingley and Jane, I have, moreover, been persuaded that an affectionate and tender regard between breeding partners can only be beneficial to the enterprise of raising a family together.”

“What, then, is the problem?” said Darcy impatiently. “Do you or do you not feel an affectionate and tender regard for me?”

“I do,” said Elizabeth. “God help me, I do!” She took a deep breath. “But I fear that these  strong emotions that we harbour for each other are beyond mere affection and regard.”

“In that you are not mistaken!” said Darcy. “For I love you with a rare passion.”

“Yes,” said Elizabeth, reluctantly, “and that rare passion is precisely the object of my concern. Last year I responded to your offer with a lamentable lack of feeling and I now deeply regret that. I should have been kinder. However, the substance of my response to you then must remain the same today. The fundamental problem has not changed: passion is not a proper basis for a breeding  arrangement.” Elizabeth felt her stomach twist with misery, for she hating hurting Darcy and was loath to decline his offer, but she forced herself to continue. “Passion is too unstable, too apt to burn out, or to transform slowly into its opposite.” She dared not look at Darcy’s face, but stared intently at the ground as she walked. “Passion is turbulent and powerful, and cannot be controlled. It is impossible for  a breeding arrangement based on passion to provide a healthy and stable atmosphere in which to raise children.”

“You are wrong,” said Darcy in frustration. He saw that she did not trust his love. She did not understand his love. He took several furious strides and then turned back to look at Elizabeth. “You have misunderstood me,” he said, calmly but with great feeling.

“When I spoke of my passion for you, I was not talking about a fire in my blood that would blaze and fizzle out. I was not talking about a thirst that can be quenched,” Darcy dismissed this flimsy facsimile of love. “I was talking about a love that partakes of the elemental forces of the universe; I am drawn to you and bound to you by the same force that binds Titan to Saturn’s orbit. All I desire is to care for you, cherish you and devote my life to you.”

“That is not how things are done on Titan,” said Elizabeth, plainly.

“No,” Darcy said, with his color rising, “That is not how things have been done on Titan. Titan has robbed us of our birthright. Titan has seduced us with the offer of a secure life, at the cost of the noblest part of our nature. If we conform to the strictures of this absurd society and repress the ungovernable divinity inside us, we are allowed some snatches of happiness: we can raise a healthy family and romance paramours. These are fine things,” he said. “But we pay for those fine things by abandoning our claim to pursue a great thing. The greatest thing. Old-fashioned romantic love -- the selfless and enduring love that enables two people to create a single sublime life together -- is that great thing. Don’t you want the life that nature has formed you for? Don’t you want love?” Darcy’s characteristic dignity and reserve was shattered by his  strength of his emotions.

“You have been born out of time, Squire Darcy. You speak of love in the way that ancient Earthan novels speak of marriage.”

“Yes,” said Darcy, “That is my meaning exactly!” He spoke with ardent enthusiasm. “I don’t just want to breed with you, Elizabeth. I want to marry you.”

Elizabeth was thrilled to hear these archaic words of love and commitment, but she did not yield to the temptation to believe in their power.

“What is marriage but an old-fashioned word for a breeding contract?”

“Marriage,” said Darcy, “Is an agreement to be everything to each other. To be breeding partners, paramours and confidantes. To be intimate in every particular.”

She longed to believe in this intoxicating fantasy, but her reason rebelled.

“But marriages did not last!” she said, vehemently. “Have you forgotten the lessons of Earthan literature? Othello, Madame Bovary, Anna Karenina, Herzog…  Novels about romance end in marriage, but novels about marriage end in death, divorce or bitter resignation.”

“That’s literature, not life,” said Darcy, stubbornly.

“But the evidence from life is the same! By the time our ancestors left Earth, over half of all marriages failed.”

“While nearly half succeeded,” said Darcy. “I would rather take a chance on a life made glorious by love than accept the security of a merely satisfactory life.”

Elizabeth was moved by the power of his conviction… and she could not deny that a great prize was worth a great risk… and what prize could be greater than the possibility of living with Darcy, and loving Darcy, and being loved by Darcy, for the rest of her life? … And yet… To taste paradise and then lose it would be worse than facing the unknown horrors of Ganymede or Callisto... It would be unendurable... Oh, if she could only see the future! How would it all end? – Death, divorce, mutual loathing? – Or tender contentment built on a bedrock of mutual passion?

They walked in silence for several minutes past the grottos and into the saguaro grove, while Elizabeth’s love struggled to conquer her fear.

Finally, she stopped, looked up at Darcy with a mixture of vunerability, anguish and hope, and said, “It’s frightening.”

Darcy took her hands into his, looked at her tenderly, and said in a soft voice. “Are you frightened of me?”

She looked at his noble, familiar face, the face that had taken root in her subconscious and infiltrated her dreams, the face that was now alight with kindness, affection and tender ardour, and she realized that he was the one man in the world that she could never fear. Suddenly the clouds of uncertainty dispersed and everything was clear.

“No,” she said, “I’m not.”

“Then will you marry me?” he asked.

“Yes,” she said. “I will.”

The happiness which this reply produced, was such as he had never felt before. Heartfelt delight diffused over his face and Elizabeth felt an answering warmth fill her own body. They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects.

“But what shall we tell our families,” said Elizabeth at last. “They will be scandalized if we tell them how deeply in love we are.”

“So we will not tell them. It would only profane our joy to try to explain it to those that cannot comprehend it,” he said.  “We will just inform them that we have decided to settle a breeding contract.”

Elizabeth smiled.

“By the time they realize how devoted we are to each other,” Darcy continued, “it will be too late for their philistine objections to matter.”

“They will gossip,” said Elizabeth.

“So they will,” said Darcy.

“For what do we live but to make sport for our neighbors,” said Elizabeth, her eyes sparkling.

Darcy looked at her with curiosity.

“It’s just something that I learned from my father,” she said gaily.

With light hearts and ecstatic spirits, they reminisced as they walked, savoring all the misunderstandings, detours and happenstances that led them to this happy conclusion. After covering several miles in this leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home.

“What could have become of Squire Bingley and Jane!” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their forthcoming contract. Darcy was delighted with their plans; his friend had given him the earliest information of it.

“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case.

“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent, and particularly about the explanation for your family’s preponderance of daughters (which I had gleaned from Mandalay’s efficient network of gossips). His delight was tremendous. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their ability to raise a happy family together.”

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend.

“Do you think Bingley is in love?” asked Elizabeth.

“Bingley is an excellent man, but a simple one. I do not suppose him to be capable of the kind of transformative passion that has brought me such profound happiness...” Darcy paused and looked at Elizabeth with such elation that he almost forgot the subject under discussion. Recollecting himself, he continued, “I have no doubt, however, that Bingley has that affectionate and tender regard for Jane that you so wisely judge to be the basis of an agreeable family life.”

In anticipating the happiness of Bingley and Jane, which of course were to be inferior only to their own, they continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted.