Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Squire Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on obstinately, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?”

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun.”

“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners—my behavior to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

“For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”

“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the lasses who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike them. Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the lasses who so assiduously courted you. There—I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me—but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.”

“You underestimate my discernment when you think that I could not detect the good in you. I judged quite early on that in both nubility of body and quality of mind you were exceptionally well-designed for motherhood. I saw, moreover, that you exhibited a fine array of traits beneficial to a parent– kindness, honesty, patience, courage, and, above all, a natural resiliance of spirit that springs from a high valuation of your own worth. I was impressed that my outspoken scorn for you seemed to amuse rather than distress you.  I knew that such a mother would be able to handle with grace the frustrations and occasional heartaches inevitably attached to raising children.”

“So you judged me to be well-qualified for breeding, in defiance of popular opinion?” 

“Let us just say that I saw your potential to be a good mother for another man’s children. However, as you, lamentably, know all too well, I was not persuaded that you were altogether the wisest choice of breeding partner for me.” 

“Indeed, I do remember that detail.”

“It was only after I had abandoned my rational assessment of your qualifications and listened to my ungovernable heart that I realized that you were the only one I wanted to breed with,” continued Darcy. “For that, I can give no explanation. The logic of the heart is impenetrable.”

“And so,” said Elizabeth, smiling, “Love conquers prudence, and we are to be paramours as well as breeding partners.”

“Yes.”

“But, Squire Darcy,” said Elizabeth doubtfully, her expression changing from playful to serious, “have you considered that mothers are rather too fully occupied by the demands of offspring to be available for romance?”

“Wasn’t it ever thus in the history of our species?” responded Darcy. “Love finds its way through the tumult of daily life.”

“I think that you have read too many romances and not enough history,” said Elizabeth teasingly. “It is my impression that on Earth, babies inevitably brought a great deal of strain to the marital relationship, often leaving no time or energy for romance.” She frowned. “And that was frequently true even when circumstances were far more favorable for mothers than here on Titan. In the past few centuries on Earth, childrearing duties were shared equally between the mother and father, household upkeep was considerably easier than on this primitive Colony, and parents were able to avail themselves of outside childcare and schools to mind the children during the day.”

“Titan does indeed present special difficulties,” said Darcy, gravely. “When considered in this light, it is unsurprising that romance is considered the domain of older women here. But,” he continued, “our abiding love for each other will help us to overcome whatever difficulties we meet.”

Elizabeth smiled wistfully and said, “Marriages usually began with love. But love often failed as practical problems became overwhelming.”

“That would not happen with us,” said Darcy stubbornly. “I would not allow it!” He spoke with the imperious command of Canute ordering the waves to retreat. He paused, however, to consider the logistical problem. “You have perhaps forgotten, Miss Bennet, that I am very well off,” he continued. “Pemberley is overflowing with servants, who will tend to your every need.”

“That’s true,” said Elizabeth, with half a smile. “But robot servants cannot raise children.” 

“No,” said Darcy, judiciously, “but they can handle the animal management, tend the crops, cook, clean the house, and relieve you myriads of other tiresome duties that many mothers are burdened with,” Darcy continued. “And I will lend my own energy and talents to the nurture and education of our offspring, when unencumbered by professional duties.” 

“Which will be seldom enough, I suppose,” said Elizabeth skeptically.

Darcy laughed, and considered further. “My grandmother will also help,” he proposed. “She is a very affectionate woman and doted over me as a child. It is perhaps our good fortune that she does not have a very active love-life, and will be sure to have time to look after the children when we have planned a romantic evening or an excursion.”

“Perhaps it can work,” said Elizabeth. The thought of romantic excursions with Darcy was sufficient to fill her heart with an airy optimism and her eyes shone in anticipation of such delights.

“And don’t forget that we will share a bed every night,” added Darcy, with a long glance at Elizabeth that comprehended both solemnity and joy.

Elizabeth’s heart leapt and her face flushed.

“We will make it work,” she said, her native confidence returning in full force. “We will be pioneers in love.” She laughed gleefully. “Where the illustrious Fitzwilliam Darcy goes, all of Titan society will want to follow. Soon it will be all the rage to be in love with your breeding partner!”

“What a scandal!” said Darcy.

“Will Lady Catherine ever forgive us, do you think?” said Elizabeth.

“I hope not!” said Darcy.