Gardiner Mater’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:

“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. I have nothing to say against him; he is a most dashing young man with all the outward signs of a superior genetic legacy; and if he had the position he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Entering a co-parenting contract with an astronaut would be a grave mistake.”

“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.” 

“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I am sure that Squire Wickham has no designs on my womb.”  But Elizabeth’s blush only encouraged Gardiner Mater’s concern.

“This is  a matter of importance, Elizabeth,” she continued. “Astronauts may have good genes, but good genes are not enough to make a  good father.  An astronaut’s job is demanding and dangerous. Even while he lives, he will be frequently away on missions, with hardly any time to attend to his children. And then, as you well know, the death rate of astronauts is alarmingly high. I would hate to see you left with a gaggle of fatherless children...”

“Please do not be concerned. I am not in love with Squire Wickham; no, certainly I am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw – and if he really came to see me as a possible mother to his children, well! I see the imprudence of it, but astronauts do find women to agree to bear their children. How can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted?”

“Your situation is rather worse than that of many of your fellow-creatures, Elizabeth. If your co-parent were to die, you would be in very bad straits. You would still have the right to stay on Titan, of course, but with no brothers and no powerful connections, how could you get by? How could you raise your fatherless brood? It is not a risk you can afford to take.”

Elizabeth was silent. She could see the wisdom of Gardiner Mater’s advice, but she hated to think that love should be so cowardly. Oh! That abominable Squire Darcy! If he had not refused to help Wickham obtain a pastorship, Wickham would now be an enviable catch rather than a hazard to her future.

“Do not let girlish infatuation lead you to neglect common sense. Love is not for lasses. Wait until you are a mature woman and your children no longer need you, and then you may pursue romance. You can even have a love affair with Wickham at that time, if you are both so inclined.”

“I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied.” Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented.

Reverend Collins returned to Mexistan soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Bennet Mater. The resolution of the breeding contract between him and Charlotte was now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “wished they might have healthy children.” They intended to have the lawyers down on Thorsday, and on Watersday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:

“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.” 

“That you certainly shall.” 

“And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?” 

“We shall often meet, I hope, in Mexistan.” 

“I am not likely to leave Darwin for some time. Promise me, therefore, to come to Hanoi.” 

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.

“My father and Maria are coming to me in Tercember,” added Charlotte, “and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome as either of them.”

The contracts were signed and the two of them set off for Darwin the next day. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over. Whereas in the past, they could share their dreams for the future, now Elizabeth could only fervently hope that her own future would be different from that of her friend. Charlotte’s first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The reverend’s house, his furniture and his herd of llamas were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most friendly and obliging. It was Reverend Collins’s picture of Hanoi and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in NeoLondon; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

Her impatience for this second email was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last email to her friend from Liqua had by some accident gone astray.

“My aunt,” she continued, “is going tomorrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Pasteur Street.”

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to Neolondon. I was right, therefore, my last email had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Squire Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Sondakh Mater were going out. I dare say I shall see them soon here.”

Elizabeth shook her head over this email. It convinced her that accident only could discover to Squire Bingley her sister’s being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The email which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt.

“My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But, my dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I cannot think why she supposed that I would not be a good mother to her brother’s children, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now, since, if he was really considering me as a breeding partner, we must have met, long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is considering Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say that he deliberately inspired my affections without ever seriously considering me a as breeding partner. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make me happy—your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield again, of his giving up the position, but not with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hanoi. Pray go to see them, with Senator Lucas and Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.—Yours, etc.”

This email gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon form a breeding contract with Squire Darcy’s sister, as by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.

Gardiner Mater about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning Wickham, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. His apparent interest had subsided, he was engaged in assessing her qualifications no longer, he was considering the merits of another. Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. An affectionate and powerful uncle was the most remarkable charm of the young lass to whom he was now turning his attention, in her person she was clumsy, without charm and had rather underdeveloped secondary sexual characteristics, being only fifteen – scarcely old enough to breed; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish for a safer and more prosperous position. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to suppose that it may require him to choose a lass with slightly inferior genes to be the mother of his children, and to make a bid for her womb before others thought to, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both. Why shouldn’t he care as much for giving his children good connections as for giving them good genes?

All this was acknowledged to Gardiner Mater; and after relating the circumstances, she thus went on: “I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much infatuated with him; for had I been, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards him; they are even impartial towards Miss Kwame. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of lass. Moreover, I am sure that no one would detect in my behavior any untoward partiality towards Wickham that could sully my reputation and make other men consider me to be a doubtful proposition. My watchfulness has been effectual. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men may not always remain content to risk their lives as astronauts and may even jump at an opportunity to secure an easier and safer life.