The next day opened a new scene at Liqua. Reverend Collins made his offer in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturnsday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Bennet Mater, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:

“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?”

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Bennet Mater answered instantly, “Oh dear!—yes—certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy—I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs.” And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:

“Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Reverend Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.”

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.” And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added: “Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and hearing Reverend Collins.”

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction—and a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Bennet Mater and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Reverend Collins began.

“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other qualifications. You would have been less suitable in my eyes had there not been this little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my assessment has been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the mother of my future children. But before I am run away with by my hopes on this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for breeding—and, moreover, for coming into Mexistan with the design of selecting a co-parent, as I certainly did.”

The idea of Reverend Collins, with all his solemn composure, meticulously weighing the pros and cons of breeding, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further, and he continued:

“My reasons for breeding are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman to set the example of parenthood in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that, when the progeny that will result when my genes are mingled with those of a nubile lass are nurtured within the comfort and culture that my circumstances enable, they will be an asset to this Colony; and thirdly—which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is now a requirement for all clergy that have taken up a parish post to find a partner and begin breeding within a year of becoming settled. Lady Catherine de Bourgh, the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness, has been instrumental in this new regulation. Twice has she condescended to give me a reminder (unasked too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturnsday night before I left Hanoi—between our games of mahjoong, while Jenkinson Mater was mixing a hot cactus toddy for Miss de Bourgh, that she said, ‘Reverend Collins, you must breed. A clergyman like you must breed. Choose a breeding partner properly, choose a gentle lass for my sake; and for your own, let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a lass as soon as you can, bring her to Hanoi, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair Elizabeth, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her status will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention to breed; it remains to be told why my search for a breeding partner has been directed towards Liqua instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many nubile young lasses. But the fact is, that destined, as I am, to be delegated this property after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a co-parent from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place—which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, Elizabeth, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you of my confidence in your qualifications to bear my children. I am aware that you have relatives that are not prime physical specimens and that some may thereby doubt the quality of your genetic heritage. There is also the strange circumstance of your mother having borne only female children. This, too, may fuel speculation as to faulty genetic mechanisms. However, I do not harbour such doubts. It is clear from looking at you, and from your grace and intelligence, that you have had the good fortune to evade any dodgy genes that may have been lurking in your ancestry. And, to be frank, my own genetic and social background is such that I am not in a position to demand perfection. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are raising children together.”

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of your offer, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to decline it.”

“I am not now to learn,” replied Reverend Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, “that it is usual with young lasses to consider an offer for some time before accepting it. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to make you the mother of my children ere long.”

“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of those young lasses (if such lasses there are) who are so daring as to risk their security on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. A co-parenting contract is a recipe for misery without respect on both sides, and I am convinced that we are profoundly unsuited. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill-qualified for the situation.”

“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Reverend Collins very gravely—”but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your nubility, motherliness, economy, and other amiable qualifications.”

“Indeed, Reverend Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you every happiness as a father, and by refusing your contract, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Liqua whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Reverend Collins not thus addressed her:

“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of reckless willfulness at present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to consider such a contract carefully, and when you reflect on your limited prospects and the uncertainty of your future, I am sure you will reconsider.”

“Really, Reverend Collins,” cried Elizabeth with some warmth, “you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have said to you can be interpreted as a request for more time to consider your offer, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one.”

“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear child, that your refusal of my addresses is merely naïve impetuosity. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my offer is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of de Bourgh, and my expectations regarding your father’s estate, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration, that in spite of your evident nubility, it is by no means certain that another offer may ever be made to you. Your family connections are unhappily so dubious, and so riddled with genetic flaws, that they will in all likelihood undo the effects of your outward appearance of fertility. As I must therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to a childish disregard for the likely consequences of your willfulness.”

“I do assure you, sir, that I am not as ignorant or short-sighted as you believe. I know well the risks I am taking and rationally consider them to be preferable to the risk of entering into a co-parenting contract with you. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your offer, but to accept it is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as a willful child, but as a rational creature, facing the abyss with eyes wide open.”

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my offer will not fail of being acceptable.”

To such perseverance in stubborn self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as ambivalence, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the waywardness of a childish female.