Miss Bingley’s email arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in NeoLondon for the dusty season, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Mexistan before he left the colony.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied the chief of it. Her suberb qualifications for motherhood were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former email. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate of Squire Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures the sophistication of the newest generation of robot staff.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s assertion of her brother’s being impressed by Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he appraised Jane’s fitness highly, respected her and was moreover fond of her, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to defer his own judgment to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own future, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best, but her sister’s was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley had really come to regard Jane as insufficiently qualified to be the mother of his offspring, or whether he had been prevailed upon by his friends to suppress his own judgement; whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded and her future equally insecure.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Bennet Mater’s leaving to visit a paramour, and Jane and Elizabeth being undisturbed for a few days, Jane could not help saying:

“Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.”

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.

“You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not that pain. A little time, therefore—I shall certainly try to get the better.”

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

“My dear Jane!” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.”

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sister’s warm affection.

“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. You wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of life in this backward colony, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the triviality of all human characters, and of the corrosiveness of our obsession with gaining the good opinion of the influential at the cost of terrible injustice. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the other is Charlotte’s breeding contract. It is horrific! In every view it is a tragedy!”

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Reverend Collins’s respectability, and Charlotte’s prudent character. Remember that she is a plain lass from a family of middling status; and that it is a situation that can provide security, offspring and the opportunity to stay close to her family. To have to breed with Reverend Collins and bear his children may not be such torture for her, and indeed she may feel something like regard for him and gratitude for the contract.”

“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding than I do now. My dear Jane, Reverend Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who raises his children must suffer irritation and humiliation every day, quite apart from having to accept the risk that her children will inherit their father’s contemptible character. You shall not belittle the ignominy of her fate. You shall not, to spare my pity for my friend, pretend that there is any justice or decency in this way of populating a colony.”

“I must think your language too strong in condemning this way of life,” replied Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happily raising a family together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned two instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking that situation is an injustice, and by saying that I am tragically wronged. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves injured. It is not Squire Bingley’s fault if he has awakened feelings in me. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. Decent men never speak of love to young lasses like ourselves and we have no right to complain if we become infatuated with them.”

“But men take pleasure in making us fall for them.” 

“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.” 

“I am far from attributing any part of Squire Bingley’s conduct to design,” said Elizabeth; “but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.” 

“And do you impute it to one of those?”

“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.”

“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?” 

“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”

“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness; and if he judges his happiness to lie in raising children with me, it is nobody’s business to convince him otherwise.”

“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to contract with a lass who has all the importance of influential relatives, powerful connections, and status.”

“Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane; “but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they esteem her better, and they may genuinely think that her genes are of a higher quality than mine. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed him to find in me the best mother of his children, they would not try to dissuade him; if they tried, they could not succeed. By supposing him to have such an assessment of me, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken—or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Squire Bingley’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

Bennet Mater still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient positive assessment, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Bennet Mater’s best comfort was that Squire Bingley must be down again in the cold season.

Bennet Pater treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he one day, “your sister fancies herself in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next to being a mother, a lass likes to be a little in love now and then. It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are astronauts enough in Mandalay to fluster all the young lasses in the colony. Let Wickham be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and, though astronauts are not compelled to settle with breeding partners quite so precipitously as most of us, he is sure to want a family sooner or later.”

“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane’s good fortune.”

“True,” said Bennet Pater, “but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make the most of it.”

Squire Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Liqua family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Squire Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to know how much they had always disliked Squire Darcy before they had known anything of the matter.

Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society of Mexistan; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes—but by everybody else Squire Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.