When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Squire Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how very much she admired him.

“He is just what a young man ought to be,” said she, “sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!”

“His breeding appears to be impeccable,” Elizabeth agreed. “It certainly has endowed him with a robust physique and a handsome countenance.  He is, moreover, very well-established, which a young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. His qualifications are thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between us. Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never. What could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing that you were about five times as fecund as any other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh! You are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life.”

“I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak what I think.”

“I know you do; and it is that which makes the wonder. With your good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others! Does it never bother you, Jane, that these men you find so charming only want us for our wombs?”

“Don’t be absurd, Elizabeth!” retorted Jane. “We are not mere wombs! Yes, they want us for our child-bearing capacities, but that alone is not all we have to offer. They also prize us for our superior genetics. That is why they care that we are pretty and lively and accomplished. We display our good genes and they know that we could bear them healthy, intelligent children.” Jane reflected with quiet composure on her own excellent breeding potential.

“But what about love?” persisted Elizabeth.

Jane looked puzzled. “But that is love, Lizzy.”

“Is it?” asked Elizabeth. “Is that all there is to love? That’s not how things use to be, in the old days... What if a gentleman evaluated you highly as a mate, decided to breed with you and then discovered that you were barren” (Jane flinched at the vulgarity) “and he wanted to share his life with you anyway. Now that would be love.”

Jane considered the absurd scenario solemnly. “Perhaps,” she said doubtfully, “but that would be romantic love, like paramour love, not co-parenting love,” she said judiciously. “And you know we will have a ample opportunity to experience paramour love some day, when we’re older, after we have bred.”

“But what if you could have paramour love with your breeding partner,” Elizabeth persisted. “Wouldn’t that be sublime?” But even as she spoke these words, Elizabeth understood the impossibility of such a fantasy. Maybe it had been possible once on Earth, but it was not suitable for modern life.

“You have been reading too many ancient Earthan books, Lizzy,” Jane responded. “You know that’s not reality. Reality is co-parenting love, children, and then maybe paramour love, if we live long enough. But that’s far in the future. For now, why not allow us to delight in the admiration of handsome men that might want us to have their babies?” she coaxed. “Like the very charming Squire Bingley...”

“Well he does have very nice manners,” Elizabeth conceded, “and his pedigree is immaculate. Moreover, he seems like a man that would treat you well…

“But tell me,” she continued. “Do you like this man’s sister and aunt, too? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and conceited.  They had the good fortune of being so well-connected that they would certainly be able to receive a dispensation to stay on Titan even if they did not find breeding partners, and coupled with that security was the unlikelihood of such an eventuality ever arising. Nature had been kind, amplying endowing them with secondary sexual characteristics that advertised their superior genetics, and they had the additional advantage of being able to supplement nature with artifice, having access to all the hair lotions, skin creams, spa treatments and cosmetics that Titan had to offer. The happy result was a superabundance of fertility signals. To complete their conspicuous superiority, they enjoyed a stunning collection of sarongs and saris to set off their shapely figures. They were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They owed their many advantages to their membership in a respectable family in New Arabia; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother’s fortune (and thus the source of their own protection) had been acquired by a swashbuckling adventurer and bioengineer.

Their great-grandfather had been exiled from Earth in circumstances that the family had chosen not to remember, but by good fortune his skills as a bioengineer had enabled him to join the pioneering project of terraforming Titan. He had been instrumental in the decision to terraform Titan just sufficiently as to allow human habitation in the equatorial zone, a 3000 mile strip girdling the moon that resembled an earthan desert, although the sand was composed of black hydrocarbon instead of silicon. After terraforming, this habitable zone was as hot as the Sahara, though surrounded by the frozen bulk of Titan on all sides, and the string of settlements within it was sufficient to provide a base for the exploitation of Titan’s precious metal and gem mines.  As a consequence of great-grandfather Bingley’s parsimonious calculations, life was rather primitive on Titan’s desert surface, but the mines made a fortune for some and a living for the rest. As one of the founding fathers, the Bingley ancestor had been granted the first copper mine on Titan and had managed it with scientific efficiency. His sons supplemented his legacy with diamond and ruby mines.

Squire Bingley had inherited property in the amount of nearly a hundred thousand platinums from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate on earth’s moon, but did not live to do so. Squire Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes even considered the possibility of buying a residency on Earth itself; but as he was now provided with a good mineshare and the liberty of the attached manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days on Titan, and leave the next generation the option of returning to the old world.

His sisters relied on his staying on Titan. It is doubtful that funds could have been found to purchase residencies for all of them on Earth, and if their brother left Titan, they could no longer rely on his protection. They would face the threat that gave all unpartnered women on Titan uneasy nights – the possibility of being exiled from Titan and forced to look for a position, as breeding partner, laborer or whore, on one of the newer, more remote and distinctly more primitive moon colonies of Jupiter, such as Callisto or Ganymede.

Although Bingley’s sisters would never admit to any anxiety regarding their ability to find suitable breeding partners, and hence secure their positions on Titan, they were nevertheless eager to make colonial life comfortable and attractive to their brother.

Now that Squire Bingley had secured a mineshare at Netherfield, Miss Bingley was pleased to preside at his table—and his aunt, Sondakh Mater, whose breeding years were behind her and whose children had reached an degree of independence that enabled her to pursue romantic liasions, was no less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her, often bringing a paramour with her. Squire Bingley had not been of age two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield mine. He did look at it, and into it for half-an-hour--was pleased with its prospects, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and accepted the position immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though polished, were not inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually giving offense.

The manner in which they spoke of the Mandalay assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people or more promising breeding prospects in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he had never met a woman more suitable to bear his children. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest in forming a breeding arrangement or even in engaging in conversation, and from none received either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be nubile, and quite likely a suitable co-parent for Bingley, but she smiled too much.

Sondakh Mater and her niece allowed it to be so--but still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet lass, and one whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore established as a sweet lass, and Squire Bingley felt authorized by such commendation to consider her qualifications for motherhood.