“I hope, my dear,” said Bennet Pater to his co-parent, as they were at breakfast the next morning, “that you are planning a good dinner today, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in—and I hope my dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger.” 

Bennet Mater’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Squire Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Squire Bingley. But—good Lord! How unlucky! There is not a bit of ostrich to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, run out and see how the baby llamas are faring. Perhaps we could spare one.” 

“It is not Squire Bingley,” said her co-parent; “it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my life.” 

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his co-parent and his five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained: “About a month ago I received this email, which I have printed out for your amusement; and about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from the pastor of Hanoi, Reverend Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.” 

“Oh! My dear,” cried his co-parent, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be taken away from your own children and granted to the church! And just because we have no sons! How could we be so unfortunate as to have had only daughters!” 

Bennett Pater listened patiently. He was aware that she knew as well as himself why they had never been able to have sons, but he also understood that she preferred to think of it  as a matter of inexplicable bad luck.

“It certainly is most unfortunate,” said Bennet Pater, “and nothing can clear Reverend Collins from the guilt of being the benefactor of his church’s good fortune. But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.”

“No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I don’t know how he can bear to speak to the family that he is expecting to dispossess.”

“Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some scruples on that head, as you will hear.” “Hanoi, near Wellington, Darwin, 15th Octember.

“Dear Sir,—

“The position of the law forbidding ownership of property by women has always given me much uneasiness, particularly in a case where there are no sons to inherit. I have frequently spoken out against this policy, but to no avail. Of course, my position of pastor in the Holy Eugenical Church does not allow me the liberty of choosing where I will live, and when the time comes, I am afraid I will be forced to take occupancy of Liqua.—’There, Bennet Mater.’—My fate is now determined on the subject, for having received ordination at the Festival of Fertility, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, formerly Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Holy Eugenical Church. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the occupancy of the Liqua estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends—but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Moonday, Nonember 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the next Saturnsday night, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.—I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your co-parent and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,

“WINONO COLLINS”

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,” said Bennet Pater, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.”

“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of baptising and burying his parishioners whenever it were required.

“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out.—There is something very pompous in his style.—And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the occupancy?—We cannot suppose he would help it if he could.—Could he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “the letter does not seem defective. And his reservations regarding the equity of gender-based inheritance laws I think are well expressed.”

To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to impossible that the reverend should be as dashing as an astronaut, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any profession. As for their mother, Reverend Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which astonished her co-parent and daughters.

Reverend Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Bennet Pater indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Reverend Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-thirty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated before he complimented Bennet Mater on having so fine a family of daughters; said he had heard much of their fecundity, but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in breeding contracts. This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Bennet Mater, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily.

“You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so, for else they will be in a desperate situation. Things are settled so oddly.”

“The law may appear draconian on this point, but I hope you appreciate its necessity. Titan is a struggling colony and we just cannot afford to support members of our community that do not contribute to population growth.”

“Ah! Sir, I do indeed appreciate that. But it is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with you, for such things. I know that pastors have little influence with the law-makers.”

“Indeed we do not, madam. We have in fact our own concessions to make. There was a time when our church required its clergy to remain celibate, but we have since come to see that it is more important for us to set a good example in the question of breeding, than to remain aloof and avoid the inevitable emotional ties that result from producing offspring. We are, after all, the Holy Eugenical Church, and thus we can hardly be unaware of the importance of maximizing genetic diversity in Titan. We cannot afford to squander even one poor pastor’s genetic resources. Now, I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to your fair daughters, and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young lasses that I come prepared to admire their nubility. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted—”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects of Reverend Collins’s admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Bennet Mater’s heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. He admired too the natural ease and apparent affection between Bennet Pater and Bennet Mater and hazarded a conjecture that they were so complementary to each other that they had no need of paramours. But he was set right there by Bennet Mater, who assured him with some asperity that they were both very well able to attract and entertain lovers. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour.