Within a short ride of Liqua lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Senator Weiming Lucas had been formerly the manager of a small tungsten mine in Mandalay, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of an appointment to the Colony senate. The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his business, and to his residence in a small mining town; and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about ten miles from Mandalay, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own importance; and since the duties of the Senate were light, consisting primarily of efficiently sanctioning the decisions of the heriditary governors, he had ample leisure to devote himself in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his position, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his appointment to the Senate had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Bennet Mater. They had several children. The eldest of them had been unable to find a breeding partner and was exiled to Ganymede, though her family did not dare to ask how she made a living there. The second eldest, a sensible, intelligent young woman of about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth’s intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Liqua to hear and to communicate.

“You  began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Bennet Mater with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. You were Squire Bingley’s first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh! You mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be sure that did seem as if he admired her qualifications—indeed I rather believe he did—I heard something about it—but I hardly know what—something about Squire Rubenstein.”

 “Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Squire Rubenstein; did not I mention it to you? Squire Rubenstein’s asking him how he liked our Mandalay assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many nubile women in the room, and which he thought the shapeliest and his answering immediately to the last question: ‘Oh! The eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”



“Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed—that does seem as if—but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“My overhearings were more to the purpose than yours, Eliza,” said Charlotte. “Squire Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he?—poor Eliza!—to be only just tolerable.”

“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Llewellyn Mater told me last night that he sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much, unless among his intimate acquaintances. With them he is remarkably agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Llewellyn Mater. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eaten up with pride, and I dare say he had heard somehow that Llewellyn Mater does not keep a ferflivver, or even a camel, and had to travel the twenty miles to the ball in a llama cart.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Llewellyn Mater,” said Miss Lucas, “but I wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with him, if I were you.”

“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you never to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend me so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune and impeccable genetics, should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a right to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive his pride, if he had not mortified mine.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who preened herself upon the solidity of her reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that the urge to obtain status among one’s conspecifics, and to defend such status once achieved, is very common indeed throughout the animal kingdom and that humans are particularly prone to it.  Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our intellectual or social status within a community, vanity to the need to attract suitable mates.”

“If I were as rich as Squire Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a houseful of domestic robots, have a fleet of ferflivvers and gyrocopters, and play war games in my holodeck all day long.”

“Oh what I would give for even one domestic robot,” sighed Bennet Mater wistfully.

“But as to spending all day in a holodeck,” she cried, turning to the boy, “I’m sure you would be immersed in fantasy a great deal more than you ought to be,” said Bennet Mater; “and if I were to see you at it, I should lock up your holodeck directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she would, and the argument ended only with the visit.