In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to their mother, to beg that the ferflivver might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Bennet Mater, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Zeusday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before then. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Bennet Mater sent them word that they could not possibly have the ferflivver before Zeusday, as her father had taken it for a few days to visit his occasional paramour; and in her postscript it was added, that if Squire Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved—nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Squire Bingley’s ferflivver immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her—that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.

To Squire Darcy it was welcome intelligence—Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked—and he was much afraid that Miss Bingley might begin to suspect the inappropriate nature of his feelings, which had nothing to do with the rational evaluation of a potential breeding partner. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of romantic inclination should now escape him, and equally that nothing could inspire Elizabeth to believe that he may be reconsidering her qualifications as a co-parent; sensible that if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturnsday, and though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Liqua or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Bennet Mater wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would suffer a relapse of her respiratory ailment. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of animal and human nature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations to listen to, concerning the mating displays of peacocks and the courtship dances of jumping spiders.

“Isn’t it odd,” remarked Kitty, “that in the animal kingdom it is the males that display, but among people is it the lasses that need to strut their stuff?”

“Oh, that is not odd at all,” Mary said condescendingly. “In species in which the female is capable of caring for the young by herself, female choice dictates mate selection. She has the power and can afford to choose only the sexiest mates. But in human society (or at least in our society), the female depends on the male to provide for the young, and even for herself. In that case, the man can be choosy, but the woman must be satisfied with any man that can offer her a living.”

“A woman can still choose among suitable candidates, though,” objected Elizabeth.

“Yes,” said Mary, reluctantly. “If she is attractive enough as a breeding partner to have a selection of offers to choose from,” and she sighed, as she thought darkly of her own prospects in that regard.

Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said at the aeronautical base since the preceding Watersday; several of the astronauts had dined lately with their uncle, one astronaut had been killed in an exploratory mission, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to choose a breeding partner.