As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Squire Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed her.

“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she, “did he come at all?” She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

“He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me? If he is still struggling to overcome his inappropriate feelings for me, why come hither? If the corrosive passion has been excised, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more about him.”

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.

“Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Zeusday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.”

“Yes, very indifferent indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh, Jane, take care.” 

“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?” 

“I do not think you are in danger of damaging your reputation. You are playing your part well. But I think you may be in danger of being hurt again. If you must love, love cautiously.”



They did not see the gentlemen again till Zeusday; and Bennet Mater, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit, had revived.

On Zeusday there was a large party assembled at Liqua; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as professional men, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her.

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Squire Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Squire Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind; and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the family room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

“If he does not come to me, then,” said she, “I shall believe him recovered from his infatuation. And I shall rejoice, for his sake,” she told herself firmly, though she knew in her heart that she would also grieve for the loss of something that should never have been allowed to exist.

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her tremulous expectation; but, alas! The ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:

“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?” Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for being so silly! “A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to be concerrned about a renewal of his offer? If he is no longer suffering from the wholly inappropriate feelings that had compelled him to propose a breeding contract with me, there is no reason for him to consider me as a co-parent. Even if he has learned that there is no reason that I would not be able to give him a son, all the other objections to my family’s imperfect genes and poverty of connections remain. And if, on the other hand, he is still in the grip of a romantic obsession, I cannot but refuse him again. There is no more perilous basis for a breeding arrangement than love!” And yet, though she knew nothing worthwhile could come of it, Elizabeth could not prevent herself from hoping that Darcy would speak to her.

Her spirits lifted when she saw him bringing back his coffee cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:

“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

“Yes, she will remain there till the Bacchanalia.” 

“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?” 

“Mizuno Mater is with her. The others have been gone on to Dharma, these three weeks.” 

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea-things were removed, and the mahjong-tables placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her mother’s rapacity for a fourth for her table. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself. No, she told herself sternly, if he can’t take his eyes off of me, then his emotional state is not conducive for his own happiness and cannot contribute to any future between us. But she nevertheless longed for an indication that she was in his thoughts.

Bennet Mater had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but they had business to attend to and could not be detained.

“Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The llama calf was roasted to a turn—and everybody said they never saw so fat a haunch. The ostrich egg curry was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases’ last week; and even Squire Darcy acknowledged, that the lizards were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has the most sophisticated robotic cook. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look more fertile. Llewellyn Mater said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Bennet Mater, we shall have her at Netherfield at last.’ She did indeed. I do think Llewellyn Mater is as good a creature as ever lived—and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and rather lacking in secondary sexual characteristics: I like them prodigiously.”

Bennet Mater, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get a contract with him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make an offer.

“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again.”

Elizabeth smiled.

“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of breeding with me. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.”

“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.”

“How hard it is in some cases to be believed!” 

“And how impossible in others!”

“But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?”

 Elizabeth’s smile faded and she said with gentle seriousness, “I only hope that you will recognize the danger your heart is in. Enjoy Bingley’s agreeable manners, by all means, but temper your hopes. If he does not offer you a breeding contract, I hope you will not let it afflict you. You need to retain that natural good health and liveliness of spirits, so that another man may come to see you as a prospective mother to his children.” 

“But another man will not be Bingley,” objected her sister.

“But another man will keep you here on Titan,” said Elizabeth, “And when the time for paramours comes … Bingley will be waiting!”