Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Squire Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; she knew not how to believe that Squire Darcy could be so unworthy of Squire Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.

“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.”

“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Squire Darcy, to be treating the child of his father’s beloved in such a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him? Oh! no.”

“I can much more easily believe Squire Bingley’s being imposed on, than that Squire Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Squire Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”

“It is difficult indeed—it is distressing. One does not know what to think.” 

“I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.” 

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point—that Squire Bingley, if he had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public.

The two young ladies were summoned from the grotto, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Squire Bingley with his sister and aunt came to give their personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Zeusday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Bennet Mater as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Bennet Mater’s civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Bennet Mater chose to consider it as given to provide an opportunity for Squire Bingley to further assess the qualifications of her eldest daughter to be the mother of his children, and was particularly gratified by receiving the invitation from Squire Bingley in person rather than by email. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing with Wickham to impress upon him her fertility and nubility, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Darcy’s look and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Wickham, he was by no means the only intended target of their fertility displays, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it.

“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough—I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I know that I must study the ways of the naturally flirtatious and learn whatever arts I can submit myself to in order to have any chance of securing a breeding contract.”

Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Reverend Collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept Squire Bingley’s invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he considered it his duty as a man of the cloth to attend such functions.

“I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, is the perfect occasion for me to demonstrate my endorsement of and participation in the mating rituals. It is essential to the future of Titan that even pastors such as myself do their part to endow the next generation with the best possible genes while ensuring genetic diversity, and to that end, I, like all childless men, will take advantage of these occasions designed for assessing the genetic health of young lasses. I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair friends in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, a preference which I trust Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being engaged by Squire Wickham for those very dances; and to have Reverend Collins instead! Her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Squire Wickham’s happiness and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Reverend Collins’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could manage. She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first struck her, that she was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mother of the reverend’s offspring. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their forming a parenting contract was extremely agreeable to her. Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply. Reverend Collins might never make the offer, and till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a incessant sandstorm as prevented their walking to Mandalay once. No aunt, no astronauts, no news could be sought after. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Squire Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Zeusday, could have made such a Fireday, Saturnsday, Sunday, and Moonday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.