“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She colored as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The acknowledged breeding partners talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; even though they had determined to present their relationship as simply a breeding arrangement, while keeping their commitment to love each other secret, she feared the family’s disapproval. She was aware that no one liked Darcy but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
At night she broached the topic with Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.
“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!—breeding with Squire Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”
“This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still wants to breed with me, and I have agreed.”
Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! It cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”
“You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.”
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth.
“Good Heaven! Can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,” cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would—I do congratulate you—but are you certain? Forgive the question—are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?”
“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to be the happiest parents in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such nieces and nephews?”
“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! Do anything rather than contract with a man without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?”
“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do, when I tell you all.”
“What do you mean?”
“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry.”
“My dearest sister, now be serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?”
“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.”
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further to wish.
“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your co-parent, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Alpaca! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.”
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia’s settlement of a contract with Wickham. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
“Good gracious!” cried Bennet Mater, as she stood at a window the next morning, “if that disagreeable Squire Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting lizards, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.”
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Bennet Mater, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again today?”
“I advise Squire Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Bennet Mater, “to walk to the Goathead Plateau this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Squire Darcy has never seen the view.”
“It may do very well for the others,” replied Squire Bingley; “but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?” 
Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Plateau, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Bennet Mater followed her, saying:
“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.”
During their walk, it was resolved that Bennet Pater’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Squire Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Bennet Pater withdrew to the den, she saw Squire Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means—that she, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her—was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Squire Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your father, he wants you in his den.” She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Squire Darcy.
“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?”
“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my indifference?”
“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”
“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes, “I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.”
“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your co-parent; unless you trusted him to be a kind and fair partner and a loving parent. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal contract. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in parenthood. You know not what you are about.”
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, only by repeated assurances that Squire Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that he was a good and kind a man as had ever lived, and enumerating with energy all his other good qualities, genetic, social and personal, she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the arrangement.
“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Squire Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.
“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing; made up the contract, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and would have paid him; but if he is so eager to have you as the mother of his children, he will not be inclined to quibble about money. I shall offer to pay him tomorrow; he will refuse, and there will be an end of the matter.”
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Reverend Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go—saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”
Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.
When her mother went up to her bedroom at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Bennet Mater sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a breeding partner to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
“Good gracious! Lord bless me! Only think! Dear me! Squire Darcy! Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! My sweetest Lizzy! How rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it—nothing at all. I am so pleased—so happy. Such a charming man!—so handsome! So tall!such impeccable genes!—Oh, my dear Lizzy! Pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters bred! With his influence, Mary and Kitty will be assured of staying on Titan as well! And ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.”
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! A hereditary governor and perhaps a president someday? And such an inheritance for your sons! But my dearest love, tell me what dish Squire Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it tomorrow.”
This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behavior to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his ardent love, and unafraid at last to love him in return, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Bennet Mater luckily stood in such awe of the future father of her grandchildren that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Bennet Pater soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem. “If your offspring resemble their parents, they will be intelligent, sensible and good-looking. And if they do not, at least they will be rich!”