Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing opinion of breeding arrangements or domestic comfort. She had never before understood why her father had chosen such a silly, empty-headed lass to bear his children but now she realized that with his defective Y-chromosome, he had had little choice. Her mother must have been desperate indeed to agree to such a precarious future as a life with no sons would bring. The contract was agreed to without any real affection on either side, and arrangements for child-rearing had to be conducted in a relationship almost completely devoid of respect or esteem. But Bennet Pater was not of a disposition to complain of the disappointments fate had burdened him with. In his youth, he found distraction in a string of attractive paramours, but as he grew older, he found himself fonder of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his co-parent he was very little otherwise indebted, than to her having borne him Elizabeth and Jane. As to his three younger daughters, he felt little to be grateful for other than the occasional amusement their ignorance and folly afforded. This is not the sort of happiness which a father would in general wish; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of Bennet Pater’s behaviour as a father. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of obligation and decorum which, in exposing his own children to contempt, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the such children, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters and, through the development of demonstrable accomplishments, enhanced their appearance of genetic quality.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the aeronautics corps. Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home, though there was the welcome respite gained by her mother’s visit to Orleans with Colonel Fitzwilliam, this relief was more than outweighed by the presence of a sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by her prolonged immersion within a throng of displaced astronauts. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had been looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity—to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Methane Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely; but her emails were always long expected, and always very short. Her letters to Elizabeth and Jane contained little else than that they were just returned from the carnival, where such and such astronauts had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful trifles as made her quite wild; that she had a new sari, or a new veil, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Forster Mater called her, and they were going off to a street dance; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less to be learnt—for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of exclamation marks and emojis to be made public.

After the first fortnight of her absence and the return of Bennet Mater, health, good humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Liqua. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the dusty season came back again, and the finery and engagements of the cold  arose. Bennet Mater was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of Sextober, Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Mandalay without tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the following Bacchanalia she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an astronaut above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the Space Agency, another aeronautics corps should be quartered in Mandalay.

The time fixed for the beginning of their eastern tour was now fast approaching, and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Gardiner Mater, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Gardiner Pater would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in Heptober, and must be in NeoLondon again within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Methane Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther eastwards than New Arabia. In that colony there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Gardiner Mater it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the treasures potentially hidden in the caverns near the Methane Lakes.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing the Methane Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied—and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.

With the mention of New Arabia there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his colony with impunity, and visit the odd crater or two, without his perceiving me.”

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and the Gardiners with their four children did at length appear at Liqua. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose motherliness and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way—teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Liqua, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain—that of suitableness of companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences—cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure—and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad.

It is not the object of this work to give a description of New Arabia, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay; the cryovolcano at Cairo, the string of small impact craters between Jericho and Monoqua, the Earthtown at Kingston, the methane river and delta, etc. are sufficiently known. A small part of New Arabia is all the present concern. To the little town of Alpaca, the scene of Gardiner Mater’s former residence, and where she had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated within five miles of Alpaca. It was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Gardiner Mater expressed an inclination to see the place again. Gardiner Pater declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?” said her aunt; “a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.”

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of seeing great houses; after Rosings, she had no interest in seeing more elegant furnishings, robot servants or electronic picture windows.

Gardiner Mater abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a technologically enhanced and well-furnished house,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the only real woods in the Colony.”

Elizabeth said no more—but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Squire Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the innkeeper whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? What was the name of its proprietor? And, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the cold season? A most welcome negative followed the last question—and her alarms now being removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme. Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.