If Elizabeth, when Squire Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Squire Wickham—when she read with somewhat clearer attention a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth—her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. She convinced herself that if she could find fault with Darcy’s account of Wickham’s profligacy, she would be justified in dismissing the more horrifying charge of his perversity, his guilt as a debaucher of innocence. With a will to disbelieve, she examined Darcy’s accusations. The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Darcy Pater, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand plats, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality—deliberated on the probability of each statement—but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Squire Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at Squire Wickham’s charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his entrance into the Ngala Corps, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Mexistan but what he told himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him at once in the possession of every virtue, both genetic and social. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Squire Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Squire Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’ continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address; but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read. Unable to justify an outright dismissal of Darcy’s claims, she girded herself to read the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy. This was unthinkable, impossible… and yet, it received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before. Yesterday, Elizabeth had struggled to believe that some men lusted after young girls who were scarcely even old enough to breed, and today she was asked to believe that the charming Wickham was such a man! Not knowing what to believe, she saw that Darcy had referred her for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs, and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Squire Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Phillips Mater’s. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a strange young lass such as herself, and wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and remembered the look in his eyes, which had seemed to hold more admiration than appraisal. She noted, too, the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing Squire Darcy—that Squire Darcy might leave the country, but that he should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Squire Darcy’s character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss Kwame were now the consequence of desires not solely mercenary but also depraved; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to breed with a fifteen-year-old girl noted for her childishness. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive and she no longer believed he cared at all for her qualifications for motherhood. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of Squire Darcy, she could not but allow that Squire Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance—an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways—seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust—anything that spoke him of improper or immoral habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued—that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling; that if he were capable of slandering Squire Wickham so grossly, while implicating his own sister in the depravity, his character could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of such calumny, and such an amiable man as Squire Bingley, was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.

“How despicably I have acted!” she cried; “I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! Who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blamable mistrust! How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been my folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.”

From herself to Jane—from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Squire Darcy’s explanation there had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned with such mortifying accusations, her confusion was severe. She had never thought that there was anything other than perverse chance at work in granting her family only daughters, but when she considered that Squire Darcy’s suspicions could be well-founded, she faltered. Was her family cursed with a genetic defect? Was it carried by Jane and even herself? Would she and Jane only be able to stay on Titan if they found men who would be content to have a family composed exclusively of girls, content to abandon hope of ever having a son and heir? Do such men exist?

The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial. When she thought of the happiness that Jane had innocently thought to be in her future and the pain that she must feel when she learns the truth, if that truth was as Darcy suspected, and when she thought also of her own bleak prospects, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.

After wandering aimlessly over the black sands for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought—re-considering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return to the little cottage set on a lawn of yellow sand; she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence; Squire Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave—but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to ride after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no object of interest to her, either as her mother’s paramour or as Darcy’s attestant; she could think only of her letter.