Reverend Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his beneficent offer; for Bennet Mater, having dawdled about in the  to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the kitchen, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Reverend Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his Elizabeth had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her youthful naiveté and indecisiveness.
This information, however, startled Bennet Mater; she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter could easily be prevailed upon to change her mind, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so.
“But, depend upon it, Reverend Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will make her know it.”
“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Reverend Collins; “but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable co-parent to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for pliability in a breeding partner. If therefore she actually persists in rejecting my offer, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of temper, she would not be the best mother to my children.”
“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Bennet Mater, alarmed. “Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a lass as ever lived. I will go directly to Bennet Pater, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”
She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her co-parent, called out as she entered his den, “Oh! Bennet Pater, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make Lizzy accept Reverend Collins’s offer, for she vows she will not, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have her.”
Bennet Pater raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication.
“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”
“Of Reverend Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not accept Reverend Collins’s offer of a breeding contract, and Reverend Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy as a breeding partner.”
“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.” 
“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her accepting the contract.” 
“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.” 
Bennet Mater disappeared and reappeared some minutes later with Elizabeth.
“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Reverend Collins has made you an offer of a breeding contract. Is it true?” Elizabeth replied that it was. “Very well—and this offer you have refused?”
“I have, sir.”
“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Bennet Mater?”
“Yes, or I will never see her again.”
“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do not agree to breed with Reverend Collins, and I will never see you again if you do.”
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Bennet Mater, who had persuaded herself that her co-parent regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.
“What do you mean, Bennet Pater, in talking this way? You promised me to insist upon her accepting his offer.”
“My dear,” replied her co-parent, “I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the den to myself as soon as may be.”
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her co-parent, did Bennet Mater give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.
Reverend Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives Elizabeth could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His positive assessment of her as a breeding partner was quite impersonal; and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met at the door by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Reverend Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not accept it.”
Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the kitchen, where Bennet Mater was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her family and secure her own future on Titan. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added in a melancholy tone, “for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.”
Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
“Aye, there she comes,” continued Bennet Mater, “looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for her own future than a pig being led to slaughter. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy—if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer in this way, you will never get a breeding partner at all—and I am sure I do not know what will happen to you when you reach the age of thirty. Your father will not be able to protect you, you know he has no such influence—and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the den, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to foolhardy children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”
Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them, till they were joined by Reverend Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls, “Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let me and Reverend Collins have a little conversation together.”
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Reverend Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Bennet Mater began the projected conversation: “Oh! Reverend Collins!”
“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had Elizabeth honoured me with her services as a breeding partner; for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter’s fertility, without having paid yourself and Bennet Pater the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable and healthy woman to bear my children, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise.”