More than once did Elizabeth unexpectedly meet Squire Darcy in her evening ride to the western hill near Rosings, where the sunset was particularly splendid. She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first that it was a favourite excursion of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and ride with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third rencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions—about her pleasure in being at Hanoi, her love of solitary rides, and her opinion of Collins Mater’s happiness; and then more than once he pointedly made reference to Colonel Fitzwilliam’s children. It distressed her a little, as she sensed that Squire Darcy was trying to remind her that Colonel Fitzwilliam was not an eligible breeding prospect. She was embarrassed that Squire Darcy could mistake her enjoyment of Colonel Fitzwilliam’s company for an attempt to display her suitability as a co-parent, and she was quite glad to find herself at the stables of the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day as she rode in reflecting on Jane’s last email, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Squire Darcy, she saw on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Forcing a smile, she said:

“I did not know before that you ever rode this way.” 

“I have been making the tour of the parish,” he replied, “as I generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?” 

“No, I should have turned in a moment.”

And accordingly she did turn, and they rode towards the Parsonage together.

“Do you certainly leave Darwin on Saturnsday?” said she.

“Yes—if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he pleases.”

“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Squire Darcy.”

“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. “And he is inclined to believe that he has the right and the responsibility to supervise other people’s lives.”

“You have had a disagreement?” Elizabeth ventured.

“Of a sort, but it is really just a misunderstanding. Darcy has warned me off you.”

 “Warned you off me? What can that mean?”

“Simply that Darcy imagines that I have developed a romantic interest in you.” 

“A romantic interest! But that is absurd! I am just a lass and it will be decades before I am of an age for paramours.” 

“Quite so, although it is not, indeed, impossible for a man to be attracted to a lass. Darcy is not wrong  in supposing that you could be in danger in the company of certain men.” 

“Impossible! That would be perverse.”

“And yet it is not uncommon,” continued Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Fortunately, however, that is not my afflication. You may rest easy, I have no romantic designs on you.”

“I never thought you had!” said Elizabeth hotly.

“But there is a reason that I have enjoyed watching you. Please don’t be alarmed. The fact is that you remind me of your mother.”

“My mother! I am nothing like my mother!” Elizabeth was at once distressed at the comparison and confused as to why such a resemblance, if it existed, should be of any interest to the Colonel.

“You are, actually, in some ways,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam. “You have her sparkling green eyes and mahogany hair. You even have much of her spirited disposition.”

“Indeed! You surprise me,” Elizabeth replied. “I did not know that you were even acquainted with my mother.”

“I am. In fact, I am in love with her,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.

“Well!” Elizabeth responded, quite nonplussed. “That is certainly interesting, but it has nothing to do with me.” Elizabeth had never liked to hear of her mother’s paramours, although she was certainly happy that she had some.

“Of course,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam. “I just wanted to explain my perhaps excessive attentiveness of late, and to assure you that I am not a danger to you or to any lass.”

“Again, Colonel Fitzwilliam, I never thought you were!” said Elizabeth. “But this outlandish idea, you think, has formed itself in Darcy’s mind?” She paused to consider. “I understand now what you mean about Squire Darcy. He deludes himself into thinking that he can understand the hearts of others.”

The conversation waned. To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said:

“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not have a paramour, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”

“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he must divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”

“Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.”

“Indeed,” he replied, “She needs looking after. As I observed before, Darcy is not wrong to suppose that some men are attracted to lasses, and she is a charming girl, though only sixteen.”

This was a strange comment and she wondered if there had been some trouble in the past with Miss Darcy. She observed Colonel Fitzwilliam’s earnest expression and directly replied:

“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Sondakh Mater and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”

“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man—he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

“Oh! Yes,” said Elizabeth drily; “Squire Darcy is uncommonly kind to Squire Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”

“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”

“What is it you mean?”

“It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the lass’s family, it would be an unpleasant thing.”

“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.” 

“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent breeding contract, but without mentioning names or any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into a situation of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last cold season.” 

“Did Squire Darcy give you reasons for this interference?” 

“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lass’s suitability for breeding.” 

“And what arts did he use to dissuade Bingley from trusting his own judgment?” 

“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “He only told me what I have now told you.” 

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.

“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”

“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?” 

“I do not see what right Squire Darcy had to decide on the trustworthiness of his friend’s assessment, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend was to breed. But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is possible that the lass was quite evidently of inferior stock.” 

“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam, “but it is a lessening of the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.” 

This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a picture of Squire Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world two men over whom Squire Darcy could have such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to set Bingley against Jane she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, he was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.

“There were some very strong objections against the lass’s suitability for breeding,” were Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and those strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who had asthma, and another who had gout, thought Elizabeth.

“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of objection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!—her understanding excellent, her training equally thorough in the practical arts and the theoretical sciences, and her fertility abundantly displayed. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has robust good health and abilities that Squire Darcy himself need not disdain.” When she thought of her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that her mother had any deficiency in her genes. A lack of education could explain her silliness, and her disposition was at least, as Colonel Fitzwilliam had noted, lively. There was really no possible reason to think that Jane could not produce the most intelligent, healthy and good-hearted of offspring, and she was quite decided, at last, that Darcy had been partly governed by the worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Squire Bingley for his sister.

The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to see Squire Darcy, it determined her not to attend her friends to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink cocktails. Collins Mater, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much as possible, prevented her breeding partner from pressing her; but Reverend Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather displeased by her staying at home.