On Saturnsday morning Elizabeth and Reverend Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.

“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether. Collins Mater has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms with few electronics and no robots, and the little we see of the world, must make Hanoi extremely dull to a young lass like yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make her feel the obliged. Reverend Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling solemnity replied:

“It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hanoi visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are of our entertainments at Rosings.”

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. “Indeed our visits to Rosings were among the highlights of my visit here,” she said, thinking about her rides in the virtual English countryside.

“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into Mexistan. I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so, and that your relatives will be pleased to hear of our successful pregnancy. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in breeding.  Our geneticist assures us that dear Charlotte and I are remarkably well-matched. We seem to have been designed for each other.”

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add that she rejoiced in the early success of his breeding efforts. Privately she reflected that it was a comfort too know that Charlotte was freed for some time from the duty of sharing his bed. She was not sorry to have the civilities interrupted by the lady in question. Poor Charlotte! It was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her pregnancy, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms. A week ago, Elizabeth’s sympathy for Charlotte had been unqualified, but now, fearing for her own future, Elizabeth wondered if Charlotte’s fate might in the end prove kinder than her own.

At length the camel carriage arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by Reverend Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at Liqua in the dusty season, and his compliments to the Gardiners, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.

“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here.”

Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off.

“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems but a day or two since we first came! And yet how many things have happened!”

“A great many indeed,” said her companion with a sigh.

“We have dined nine times at Rosings, and played in the holodeck twice! How much I shall have to tell!”

Elizabeth added privately, “And how much I shall have to conceal!” Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and after a wearisome journey of twelve hours across the desert, they reached Gardiner Pater’s house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at Liqua there would be leisure enough for observation.

It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Liqua, before she told her sister of Squire Darcy’s proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate; she could hardly discuss the proposal without mentioning the dark suspicions that Darcy harbored concerning the  genetic soundness of Bennet family, and she was determined not to burden Jane with all the attendant horror of this possibility until she had confronted her father on the matter. She must know the truth.