Not all that Bennet Mater, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject was sufficient to draw from her co-parent any satisfactory description of Squire Bingley. They attacked him in various ways; with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable.  Senator Weiming had been delighted with him. He was quite young, had a handsome physique that spoke of a good genetic heritage, was extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To engage in dancing is certainly a time-honoured means of evaluating reproductive fitness; and very lively hopes of Squire Bingley’s choice lighting on a local lass were entertained.
“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Bennet Mater to her co-parent, “and all the others with equally good contracts, I shall have nothing to wish for.”
In a few days Squire Bingley returned Bennet Pater’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his den. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young lasses, of whose fecundity he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The lasses were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window, that he wore an azure thobe with gold trim and rode in a handsome two-camel carriage. The white camels against the black sands looked magnificent, posing with the haughty dignity of exquisitely well-bred beasts.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had Bennet Mater planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an email arrived which deferred it all. Squire Bingley was obliged to be in the capital the following day, and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation, &c. Bennet Mater was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in the city so soon after his arrival in Mexistan; and she began to fear that he might be flying about from one place to another, evaluating potential breeding partners throughout the colonies. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his being gone to NeoLondon only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Squire Bingley was to bring twelve lasses and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a large number of lasses; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from NeoLondon, his four sisters, an aunt and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly room, it consisted of only five altogether; Squire Bingley, his sister, an aunt and her paramour, and another young man.
Squire Bingley was good looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sister and aunt were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His older sister’s paramour, Hernandez Pater, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Squire Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and the report which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man and the lasses declared his genetic endowment to be superior even to that of Squire Bingley. He was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company, and above any consideration of local breeding prospects; and not even his management of a large diamond mine could save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend.
Squire Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Squire Darcy danced only once with Squire Bingley’s aunt, Sondakh Mater, and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to any other lass, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst the most violent against him was Bennet Mater, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Squire Darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and Squire Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his friend to join it.
“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. People will think you’re unfit. You had much better dance.”
“I certainly shall not. I don’t care a pebble what people think and you know how I detest it. It is unseemly for a man to take pains to display his genetic quality, and I have no wish to assess the qualifications of any lass here. Your sister is engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with.”
“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a Martian kingdom! Upon my honour I never met with so many pleasant lasses in my life, as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see, uncommonly nubile, and quite brimming with motherly qualities.”
“You are dancing with the only shapely lass in the room,” said Squire Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
“Oh! She is the most fecund and maternal creature I ever beheld! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very nubile, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask Miss Bingley to introduce you.”
“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said, “She is tolerable; but not shapely enough to tempt me; and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young lasses who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your nubile partner  and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”
Squire Bingley followed his advice. Squire Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story however with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in any thing ridiculous.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Bennet Mater had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Squire Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished lass in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. And never had a ball  been so beautiful! The brightly colored saris of the ladies, the elegant linen robes of the gentlemen, the lanterns, the music, the wine...
They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Liqua, the village where they lived, and of which they were the only inhabitants of consequence. They found Bennet Pater still up. With a book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his coparent’s views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear.
“Oh! My dear Bennet Pater,’” as she entered the room, “we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Every body said how healthy she looked; and Squire Bingley thought her fecund and well-grown, and danced with her twice. Only think of that my dear; he actually danced with her twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all: indeed, nobody can, you know, with those skinny hips and lacklustre hair – the perfect embodiment of feeble genes. He seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So, he enquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the jig he danced with Miss Kwame, and the fandango with Maria Lucas, and the jitterbug with Jane again, and the Charleston he danced with Miss Lizzy, and the Quadrille --”
“If he had had any compassion for me,” cried her coparent impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of his partners. Oh! That he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!”
“Oh! My dear,” continued Bennet Mater, “I am quite delighted with him. He is such a paragon of genetic fitness! And his sister and aunt are charming, well-endowed ladies. I never in my life saw any thing more elegant than than the dresses. I dare say the silver embroidery upon Sondakh Mater’s sari --”
Here she was interrupted again. Bennet Pater protested against any description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Squire Darcy.
“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not suiting his fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So high and conceited that there was no enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great! Not nubile enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have given him one of your set downs. I quite detest the man. I hope that the entirety of his fortune is inadequate to persuade a single lass to bear his horrid offspring!”