The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off a supposed breeding arrangement between her and Squire Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! But from what the report of their arrangement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that his being the intimate friend of Bingley, and her being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one contract made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the contract with her sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and immediate, which she regarded as unlikely and unworkable.



In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness. Lady Catherine had noticed Darcy’s inappropriate attraction to young women and very reasonably suspected that his feelings would interfere in the rationality of his judgment in choosing a breeding partner. Certainly Lady Catherine was perspicacious and had good reason to be concerned, but Elizabeth burned with indignation when she thought of Lady Catherine’s accusation that she used arts and wiles to take advantage of Darcy’s weakness! The very opposite was true! She hoped, she longed, for Darcy to recover from the agitation of passion and become the sort of man that one could consider breeding with! But, of course, without the blindness of romantic fervor, Darcy would see that his aunt was right – Elizabeth was sorely unqualified to be the mother of his children. What a dilemma – Elizabeth could hardly bear that Darcy would lose all interest in breeding with her and yet there was no possibility of a good resolution while he remained under the sway of infatuation!



“I must think of his welfare,” she told herself sternly. “I must hope that his passion for me is replaced by an appropriate attraction to an older woman, and that later, when his mind and his emotions are settled, he can set about finding a suitable mother for his children. If he can be thus satisfied, I will be satisfied too,” she told herself firmly. “And as for myself, I still have seven years to find a breeding partner, and since my family is has retained its respectability due to Darcy’s kind and exceptional interference, that should not provide too great a challenge.” And maybe, she thought, she and Darcy could be paramours someday. Half a lifetime later!



The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Bennet Mater’s curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.



The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his den, his eyes shining with mischief.



“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you; come into my room.”



She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by seeing that her father was looking at a email on his computer. It suddenly struck her that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations.



She followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down. He then said,



“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink of breeding. Let me congratulate you on attracting a very important prospect.”



The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be gratified or alarmed at the possibility that he would consider pursuing his object through the influence of her father.



“You look conscious. Lasses have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may defy even your sagacity, to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Reverend Collins.”



“From Reverend Collins! And what can he have to say?”



“Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching  motherhood of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: ‘Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Collins Mater and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.’



“Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid genes, vast wealth, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure of a contract with this gentleman, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’



“Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:



“‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.’



“Squire Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I have surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related? Squire Darcy, who never looks at any lass but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life! It is admirable!”



Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.



“Are you not diverted?”



“Oh! Yes. Pray read on.”



“‘After mentioning the likelihood of this breeding arrangement to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some objections to your family’s genetics, she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to you, that she and her propective co-parent may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a contract which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Reverend Collins moreover adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that Lydia’s sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their living together before the contract was settled should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they settled a contract. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Liqua, I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ That is his notion of Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of an heir. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be missish, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?”



“Oh!” cried Elizabeth, “I am excessively diverted. But it is so strange!”



“Yes—that is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but his obvious scorn for you as a breeding prospect, and your pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Reverend Collins’s correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value his impudence and hypocrisy. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”



To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Squire Darcy’s scorn, and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration. Perhaps, though, she told herself, her father was correct in his perception and Darcy’s former passion had already transformed into scorn. If so, she could only be gratified at this best of all possible resolutions to a painful situation.