The whole party were in hopes of an email from Bennet Pater the next day, but the morning passed without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of that they would have been glad to be certain. Gardiner Pater waited until noon before he set off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Bennet Pater to return to Liqua, as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her co-parent’s not being arrested for murder.

Gardiner Mater and the children were to remain in Mexistan a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Bennet Mater, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up—though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or debauchery, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.

All Mandalay seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and every tradesman’s family had had reason to fear for their young daughters. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister’s ruin more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come when, if they had gone to draw up a breeding contract, they must in all probability have informed the family of the news.

Gardiner Pater left Liqua on Sunday; on Zeusday his co-parent received an email from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Lizardneck Lane; that Bennet Pater had been to Natalia and Silverstone, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Bennet Pater thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to NeoLondon, before they procured lodgings. Gardiner Pater himself did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Bennet Pater seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave NeoLondon and promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:

“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the corps, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other person.”

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the Ngala Corps might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Liqua was now a day of anxiety. The arrival of emails was the grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through email, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Gardiner Pater, an email arrived for their father, and copied to their mother, from a different quarter, from Collins Pater; Bennet Mater declared herself to be unfit to attend to such trifles and requested that Jane read it; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:

“MY DEAR SIR,

“I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by an email from Mexistan. Be assured, my dear sir, that Collins Mater and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune—or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Bennet Mater, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be congenitally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Collins Mater, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last Nonember; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and save your sympathy for your four innocent daughters who, most unjustly, are left to face the tragic repercussions of their sister’s heinous offence.

“I am, dear sir, etc., etc.”

Gardiner Pater did not write again till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintances had been numerous; but since he had been in the aeronautics corps, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations, for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Orleans. He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Gardiner Pater did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Liqua family. Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.”

“Darling Jane, is there no limit to your capacity for surprise?” Elizabeth asked in sad amusement. “An esteemed gentleman risks his good name, his career and possibly his life for some illicit thrills with our sister, and you are astounded that he also risks his money on dice!”

Gardiner Pater added in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which was Saturnsday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his Gardiner Pater’s entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When Bennet Mater was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety for his life had been before.

“What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he will not leave NeoLondon before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him establish a breeding contract, if he comes away?”

As Gardiner Mater began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and the children should go to NeoLondon, at the same time that Bennet Pater came from it. The camel cart, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Liqua.

Gardiner Mater went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her New Arabia friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Gardiner Mater had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Of course, if the present matter could not be resolved without scandal, there could be no hope of Elizabeth breeding with Darcy, but Gardiner Mater still held out hope for a more felicitous outcome.

Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two. Even the prospect of exile on Ganymede would have been a little less wretched without the consciousness of having been offered, and having turned down, a very different future.

When Bennet Pater arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I ought to feel it.”

“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.

“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. It will pass away soon enough.”

“Do you suppose them to be in NeoLondon?” 

“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?” 

“And Lydia used to want to go to NeoLondon,” added Kitty.

“She is happy then,” said her father drily; “and her residence there will probably be of some duration.”

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s tea.

“This is a parade,” he cried, “which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my den, in my robe and slippers, and give as much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”

“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty fretfully. “If I should ever go to Orleans, I would behave better than Lydia.”

“You go to Orleans? I would not trust you so near it as Ishtar for fifty plats! No, Kitty, if you are to have a future, you will have to excel in respectability. No astronaut is ever to enter into my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.  And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.”

Kitty looked distressed.

“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. Unlike your older sisters, you have a full thirteen years to find yourself a mate. Perhaps after ten years has passed, and you have become a paragon of good sense, our disgrace will be well enough forgotten by the world as to allow some desperate youth with a bad knee and a squint to consider you to be the mother of his children.”

Kitty began to cry.