The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Reverend Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.” Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her from any return of Reverend Collins’s interest, by engaging it towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost secure of success if he had not been to leave Mexistan so very soon. But here she did injustice to the impetuousness of his character, for it led him to escape out of Liqua House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to speak with her. He was anxious to avoid the notice of the Bennets, from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging, he was afraid that if his second offer of a breeding contract was similarly rejected, he would be a laughing stock. His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had she dared to hope that so much eagerness and eloquence awaited her there.
In as short a time as Reverend Collins’s long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house he earnestly entreated her settle the formalities as quickly as possible to make him the happiest of fathers. The lass felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature was not a sufficient guarantee against another woman angling to land the security his position offered; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, was as eager as he that that establishment be gained promptly.
Senator Weiming and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Reverend Collins’s present circumstances made the position most advantageous for their daughter, whose security was uppermost in their minds. Senator Lucas’s influence was not sufficient to save her from the common fate of the unpartnered, as indeed he had been unable to save her elder sister. Moreover, Reverend Collins’s expectation of being granted the residence of Liqua was a decided attraction. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer Bennet Pater was likely to live. The whole family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of coming on the market a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’s being exiled to Ganymede with their sister and likely never seen again. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Reverend Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his genes undoubtly subpar. But still he would be the father of her children. Without thinking highly of motherhood, it was infinitely preferable to the alternative. However uncertain of giving happiness, it at least secured the right to continue living on the same planet as her family and friends. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been endowed with more than the most feeble signs of fecundity, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Reverend Collins, when he returned to Liqua to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his impending fatherhood.
As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; and Bennet Mater, with great politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Liqua again, whenever his engagements might allow him to visit them.
“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible.”
They were all astonished; and Bennet Pater, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately said:
“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my good sir? You had better neglect your friends than run the risk of offending your patroness.”
“My dear sir,” replied Reverend Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her ladyship’s concurrence.”
“You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that we shall take no offence.”
“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Mexistan. As for your fair daughters, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health, happiness and the best possible fortune in finding breeding partners, not excepting my dear Elizabeth.”
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised that he meditated a quick return. It occurred to Mary that he might be thinking of paying his addresses to one of the younger sisters, and perhaps even to herself. She was sufficiently aware of the precariousness of her own position to be interested in establishing a contract even with a man who was certainly her intellectual inferior. She persuaded herself that Reverend Collins’s dullness was probably not due so much to his genes as to his deprived and abusive childhood. Thus she assured herself that, were she to breed with him, the resulting children would benefit so greatly from her nurturance as to grow into tolerably intelligent and interesting people. But on the following morning, her desperate daydreams were done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.
The possibility of Reverend Collins’s appraising her friend’s qualifications for breeding had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could accept him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could accept him herself, and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out:
“Breed with Reverend Collins! My dear Charlotte—impossible!” The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied: “Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think the offer of a breeding contract with Reverend Collins should be met with as much disdain from a homely 27-year-old as it did from a nubile 22-year-old?” 
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.
“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte. “You must be surprised, very much surprised—so lately as Reverend Collins was wishing to breed with you. You must think he is very indiscriminate in his choice. If that is the case, I must count myself lucky. When you have had time to think it over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I never was. I ask only for an opportunity to remain on Titan near my family, you and everything I’ve ever known; and considering Reverend Collins’s connections and situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness as the mother of his children is as fair as most people can boast on entering a parenting contract.”
Elizabeth quietly answered “Undoubtedly”; and after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match. Charlotte breeding with Reverend Collins was a humiliating picture! Charlotte’s reasoning was cold, but also clear-eyed and impossible to condemn. Her pity for Charlotte was profound. That she should have to share her bed with that dismal man and bear his dullard children just to be able to stay on this barren world was nauseating. Elizabeth hoped that if she herself were ever faced with such a dreadful choice, she would take her chances on Ganymede or Callisto. Her heart quaked at the thought, however, and she wasn’t sure she was brave enough to face an uncertain fate alone on a strange world.  She was grateful that her 30th birthday was still eight years away.