When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Squire Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the emails which Jane had written to her since her being in Darwin. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Squire Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next—and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell, and when she opened the door, she saw, to her utter amazement, Squire Darcy. He walked into the room and in an hurried manner immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began:
“In vain I have struggled. It will not do. I have made a decision. I want you to be my breeding partner.”
Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement.
“I do not believe you to be the wisest choice,” he continued. “In fact, it is most imprudent of me to consider mixing your family’s genes in with my own. Lady Catherine will be furious, my relations will be scandalized, and if I cannot have a son, my inheritance will be lost to my descendants...”
Elizabeth stared and, with the detachment born of shock, she honed in on a single solid idea within a cloud of confusion, “And, why, pray, would you not be able to have a son?”
Darcy looked at her in some surprise. “You parents have only daughters. There must be a reason.”
“A reason?” Elizabeth echoed. “What need is there of a reason?” She looked at him in bewilderment “It is a matter of chance! A quirk of nature! The luck of the draw!” Elizabeth now felt her resources muster to face this strange accusation, while the even stranger thought of Darcy wishing to breed with her was still too difficult to take in.
Darcy looked at her doubtfully. “Surely you can’t believe that,” he said. “Not on Titan. After the first daughter, any other couple would have taken to IVF to ensure a son.”
Elizabeth was stunned. She had never before thought it at all odd that her parents had had only daughters.
“Perhaps they wanted to let nature take it’s course,” she said uncertainly.
“Do your parents seem to you like the kind of fanatics that would bring disaster upon themselves and their family for the sake of forgoing medical intervention?” Darcy countered.
He saw her confusion and tried to resume his suit. “But that doesn’t matter,” he said. “I’m willing to take the chance because I have decided that you are the only lass who is suitable to bear my children.”
Elizabeth was shaken out of her confusion by this resumption of the topic of breeding. “But why?” she said. “It makes no sense. You cast peculiar aspersions on my family and are suspicious of the soundness of my genes, your family would disapprove, and you don’t even like me.”
“That is your mistake,” said Darcy. “I do not dislike you.” He paused, drew a breath and continued. “I do in fact most ardently admire and love you.”
Elizabeth was stunned to silence. Love, she thought blankly. It cannot be. Lasses sometimes fancy themselves in love with a man, but a man -- a mature, respectable man -- does not love lasses. Her own personal dislike of Darcy was overshadowed by the shock of hearing this confession of unnatural desire.
“This cannot be,” she said. “You are confused. You are mixing up breeding arrangements and romantic feelings. Even if I could like you, which I could not, I would never consider breeding with a man who was in love with me.”
Darcy looked down and then walked to the window and gazed out of it. After a minute, he returned to Elizabeth.
“You lasses,” he said slowly, “have been led to believe that men are only attracted to older women. That is not true. You don’t have to be a deviant to be attracted to a sexually mature lass. I have tried to control my feelings, in deference to the peculiar mores of this society, but they are not shameful.” Darcy paused for a moment and continued.  “I want you to know the truth – that I love you as I have never loved another.”
Elizabeth struggled to remain cool and rational. These were unfamiliar waters and her vanity was stirred in spite of herself, but she would not reveal these girlish perplexities. “Attraction,” she paused for consideration. “Attraction between a man and a lass may not be unnatural,” she said judiciously. “But it is certainly dishonourable and ought to be suppressed.”
Darcy looked at her as though trying to reach across a chasm. He never doubted that girls saw the world differently than men did, but he was unprepared for the thoroughness with which lasses had been indoctrinated into thinking that they were not desirable to men. “Do you really think that a man would take a breeding partner that he was not attracted to?”
“Attraction is irrelevant,” Elizabeth stated. “They have only to consider the suitability of a lass to bear and raise their children.”
“But men are not machines,” said Darcy. “That they must take into account a lass’s qualifications is, of course, a certainty, but in the end they will choose a lass that they will enjoy breeding with. No man can deny that fact.”
Elizabeth considered. Could it be that Squire Darcy was just trying to justify his own perversion by projecting his desires onto the entire male gender? Or could there be something to what he said? Would it be so strange for men to lust for lasses?
“Perhaps what you say is true,” said Elizabeth. “That does not justify you’re making love to me in this manner. You may be attracted to me but you spoke not just of attraction but of love. Love, at least, has no part in a breeding contract,” she said decidedly.
“Love has been part of breeding arrangements for centuries,” Darcy countered. “It is only the bizarre nature of Titanian social arrangements that tries to separate them.”
“Love is dangerous,” said Elizabeth. “It undermines the stability of the parenting arrangement. Children should not be brought into a relationship that depends on such a violent and fickle emotion. I could never breed with a man who claims to be in love with me.”
Squire Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise.
“Is that your response then to my offer? Are you refusing to consider breeding with me?” 
“Indeed I am,” replied Elizabeth.
His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings dreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:
“Had I come to you with hypocritical rationality and told you that I had decided that you were the best candidate that I had come across, that you had the best genes and the most desirable family connections and that I had therefore concluded that I should like to enter a breeding contract with you, would you have consented to have children with me?”
“You are mistaken, Squire Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued: “You could not have made the offer of your contract in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.” Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on: “Do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?” 
As she pronounced these words, Squire Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued: “I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there. You dare not, you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means of turning Bingley against Jane—of exposing her to the derision of the world for disappointed hopes and misery of the acutest kind.” She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
“Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.
With assumed tranquillity he then replied: “I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards him I have been kinder than towards myself.”
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.
“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Squire Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? Or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”
“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an interest in him?” 
“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy contemptuously; “yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.” 
“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth with energy. “You have reduced him to his present state of poverty—comparative poverty. You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! And yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and ridicule.” 
“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, “is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, “these offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my concerns about your family’s breeding capacities and disguised my own ardent inclination. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. My only fault is to be more honest than most men.” 
“It makes no difference,” she said. “I would never consent to breed with a man I did not respect, and I have never met a man I have been less inclined to respect.” 
She went on, “From the very beginning—from the first moment, I may almost say—of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world with whom I could ever be prevailed upon to breed.”
“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.”
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried for half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of a breeding contract from Squire Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for so many months! In love with a lass! So much in love as to wish to breed with her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend’s breeding with her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case—was almost incredible! And the strange character of those objections, his inexplicable belief that if he were to breed with her he would have to reconcile himself to never having a son! And to say that love compelled him to accept such a possibility! It was frightening to have unconsciously inspired so strong a passion. And his pride, his abominable pride—his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane—his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging it, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Squire Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his involuntary and wholly inappropriate passion had for a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the whirr of Lady Catherine’s gyrocopter made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room.