It is a truth universally stipulated by the law of every colony on Titan, that a childless man endowed with the management of a good mineshare must be in search of a breeding partner.

However the feelings or views of such a man, he is under the obligation to choose a lass to become the mother of his children within two years of taking up the post.

So familiar is this point of law that, on taking up a mineshare, a childless man is immediately considered the rightful protector of some one or other of the daughters of the surrounding families.

“My dear Bennet Pater,’’ said his co-parent to him one day, “have you heard that Netherfield mine is to be open again at last?”
Bennet Pater replied that he had not.
“But it is,” returned she; “for Llewellyn Mater has just been here, and she told me all about it.” Bennet Pater made no answer. He was engaged in applying sealant to the edges of the windows to sand-proof them in preparation for the upcoming sandstorm. It was a task that had to be repeated almost every week, as the sands were unrelenting in their assaults.
“Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his co-parent impatiently.
“You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.” This was invitation enough.
“Why, my dear, you must know, Llewellyn Mater says that the management of Netherfield has been granted to a young man of large fortune from the East, from New Arabia; that he came down on Moonday in a silver V28 Maxius ferflivver to see the place, and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with Morris Pater immediately; that he is to take possession before the end of the dusty season, and some of his employees are to start preliminary work in the mine by the end of next week.”
“What is his name?”
“Bingley.”
“Is he a father or still without issue?”
“Oh! Without issue, my dear, to be sure! A childless man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”
“How so? How can it affect them?”
“My dear Bennet Pater,’’ replied his co-parent, “how can you be so tiresome! You must know that I am thinking of his choosing one of them as a breeding partner.”
“Is that his design in settling here?”
“Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! His designs are quite beside the point. You know that he must choose a breeding partner if he is to settle here. You must visit him as soon as he comes.”
“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls go, or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for, as you appear as fertile as any of them, he might like you the best of the party.”
“My dear, you flatter me. I certainly may still retain the appearance of fertility, but I am sure he would be able to perceive that I have already bred. When a woman has five grown up daughters, she can no longer indulge in the idle fantasy of further procreation.”
“Indeed, we have made our contribution to the population of this god-forsaken colony. Surely we can rest on our laurels for a little while before scheming on behalf of the next generation.”
“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Squire Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.”
“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”
“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them. Senator and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account, for you know we have so few breeding prospects in the area. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for us to visit him, if you do not.”
“You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Squire Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his breeding with which ever he chooses of the girls; though I must add in a line to dissuade him from fixing on Lizzy.”
“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane nor half so good humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving her the preference.”
“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he; “they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters, and it would be a shame to have that light dimmed too soon by the strictures of motherhood.”
“Bennet Pater, how can you abuse your own children in such way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”
“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.’’
“Ah! You do not now what I suffer. You know that if Lizzy, or indeed any of the girls, fails to find herself a breeding partner before she is thirty, she will be forced to leave Titan. Then what will happen to your darling Lizzy?”
“But she is only twenty-two, my dear, and will live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”
“It will be no use to us if twenty such should come, since you will not visit them.” 
“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty I will visit them all.’’ Bennet Pater was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of five and twenty years had been insufficient to make his co-parent understand his character. Her mind was less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper, but she was also a women with a great affection for her daughters and a lively horror of losing them to exile. When she was nervous, her co-parent castigated her for being silly, but no castigation could sooth her nerves. The business of her life was to get her daughters contracted to a suitable breeding partner, the alternative unthinkable, and the eldest already twenty-four.