Jane and Elizabeth were in the poultry house gathering eggs for breakfast when they saw their father striding across the sands towards them in an old linen thobe with his headscarf so carelessly wound that it was in danger of unravelling at every step.

“How are the ostriches laying?” he asked.

“Quite well,” answered Elizabeth, surprised at her father’s query, as he normally exhibited little interest in food production. “Six large eggs this morning. They have responded quite well to the mixture of ground cactus, lentils and soy that Mary developed for them.”

“Hm,” her father grunted, staring vacantly at the birds who, being unused to visits from the master of the house, stared vacantly back.

“I’ve received an email,” Bennett Pater said at last, pulling a letter out of the folds of his robe.

“Oh, papa, what news—what news?” cried Elizabeth. “Is it from my uncle?” “Yes.”

“Well, and what news does it bring—good or bad?” “What is there of good to be expected?” said he. “But I have printed it out for you. Perhaps you would like to read it.” He offered her the paper.

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand.

“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is about.” “Lizardneck Lane, Moonday, Octember 2.

“MY DEAR BROTHER,

“At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturnsday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of NeoLondon they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen them both—”

“Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane; “they are establishing a contract.” Elizabeth read on:

“I have seen them both. They have not seen a lawyer, nor can I find there was any intention of doing so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they have a contract drawn up. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter’s co-parent, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand platinums secured among your children’s breeding partners, if any, after your decease; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing him, during your life, one hundred platinums per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I am sending this email immediately, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Squire Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to provide for your grandchildren, in addition to your contribution. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Muhammad for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at Liqua, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that the contract be settled here in NeoLondon of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us today. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,

“EDW. GARDINER.”

“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be possible that he will agree to accept her as the mother of his children?”

“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,” said her sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”

“And have you answered the email?” cried Elizabeth.

“No; but it must be done soon.”

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote.

“Oh! My dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”

“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble yourself.” 

“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.” And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

“And may I ask—” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with.”

 “Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.” 

“And they must breed! Yet he is such a man!” “Yes, yes, they must breed. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want very much to know; one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever to pay him.” 

“Money! My uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?” 

“I mean, that no man in his senses would breed with Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am gone.” 

“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh! It must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.” 

“No,” said her father; “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a copper less than ten thousand plats. I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.” 

“Ten thousand plats! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?” 

Bennet Pater made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to his den to write, and the girls walked into the kitchen.

“And they are really to be become co-parents!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. “How strange this is! And for this we are to be thankful. That they should have children together, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Lydia!”

“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would not agree to breed with Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand plats, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand plats?”

“If he were ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Gardiner Pater has done for them, because Wickham has not silver of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said Jane: “I hope and trust that the children that result from this arrangement will not take after their father. We can anticipate that such a close brush with catastrophe will make Lydia a conscientious and cautious mother, while Wickham is likely to be so negligent a father that his influence can be minimized. I flatter myself the matter will settle so quietly, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten.”

“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “that the world can ever forget.” 

“But the worst is averted, you must confess,” persisted Jane.

“Yes,” said Elizabeth, allowing herself to acknowledge a great sense of relief. “The scandal is mostly averted and our family need not be forever deemed unworthy of producing heirs.”

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They arrived back to the house with their father and asked him whether he would not wish them to make it known to her. He coolly replied:

“Just as you please.”

Elizabeth took the letter from her father, and they went up stairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Bennet Mater: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Bennet Mater could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Gardiner Pater’s hope of Lydia’s being soon contracted to Wickham, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be breeding was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried. “This is delightful indeed! She will be bred! I shall see her again! She will be bred at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage everything! How I long to see her! And to see dear Wickham too! But the layette, the baby clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Gardiner Pater’s behavior laid them all under.

“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Squire Wickham with money.”

“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If  it weren’t for the sexist laws of this Colony, I and my children should have inherited half the money from my father; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him, except a few presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have grandchildren! How glorious! And she was only sixteen last Sextober. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of swaddling clothes, teething rings and baby carriers, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.

“I will go to Mandalay,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Llewellyn Mater. Kitty, run down and harness up the llamas. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Mandalay? Oh! I can’t wait to spread that news. I shall tell everyone I meet that Miss Lydia is going to be breed with Wickham; and we’ll have a grand party to make merry when her first baby is on the way.”

Elizabeth, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.

Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to the fate that had seemed all but inevitable for her four sisters and herself, only two hours ago, she was deeply thankful for the advantages of what they had gained.