During dinner, Bennet Pater scarcely spoke at all; but when the women had finished clearing up, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Bennet Pater could not have chosen better. Reverend Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of status—such affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturnsday before, to make up her table of mahjong in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew, but he had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his future home. She had even condescended to advise him to find a breeding partner as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself—a humidifying vent in the sitting room.

“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Bennet Mater, “and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that there are not more great ladies like her. Does she live near you, sir?”

“The grounds in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her ladyship’s residence.”

“How is it that a woman is able to be mistress of such an estate?” asked Bennet Mater.

“I am surprised that you not familiar with her history, madam,” replied Squire Collins. “Lady Catherine is, if I may put it delicately, anatomically and legally male. She was formerly known as Sir Lewis de Bourgh but adopted her present style some twenty years ago.”

“I see. Has she any family?”

“She had a breeding contract with a young lass in her youth, but most distressingly proved to be quite sterile. The breeding contract was, of course, dissolved, and she never had children of her own. As it happened, however, a good friend of hers died in childbirth, shortly after her co-parent had met his demise in a mining accident, and the pair left behind two young children. Lady Catherine had the good fortune to adopt them, the boy becoming the heir of Rosings and the girl living under the protection of her brother and her poweful new mother.

“Ah!” said Bennet Mater, shaking her head, “then she is better off than many girls. And what sort of young lass is she? Is she handsome?”

“She is a most charming young lass indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks the young lass of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution and does not exude fertility. In  another lass, this fact might portend difficulty in securing a breeding contract, but with the benefits that would accrue through a family connection with Lady Catherine de Bourgh, some slight imperfections in genetic quality can be easily overlooked by potential breeding partners. The result of genetic reassortment is so difficult to predict at the best of times, after all, and ‘many a stout lad has been bred from a scrawny woman’, as my uncle used to say.”

“Is she on the market? I do not remember her name in the roll of lasses attending the recent Fertility Ball in NeoLondon.”

“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her attending many large events; and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the high society of Titan of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a Martian princess, and that such an elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would have been adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Bennet Pater, “and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?”

“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible.”

Bennet Pater’s expectations were fully answered. The reverend was as absurd as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure.

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Bennet Pater was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Reverend Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it, he started back, and begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose Fordyce’s Sermons on Eugenics and Good Breeding. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with:

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips has quite fallen in love with the co-parent of one of the generals. My aunt told me so herself on Saturnsday. I shall walk to Mandalay tomorrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Squire Denny comes back from town.”

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Reverend Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:

“I have often observed how little young lasses are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction in the art of breeding. But I will no longer importune my young acquaintance.”

Then turning to Bennet Pater, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Bennet Pater accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Bennet Mater and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia’s interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Reverend Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young acquaintance no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with Bennet Pater, and prepared for backgammon.