The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Reverend Collins, having been in waiting near the stables, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very good health and in as tolerable spirits. To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as the mother of her grandnieces and grandnephews; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? How would she have behaved?” were questions with which she amused herself.

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. “I assure you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”

Reverend Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits, and immediately accounting for it by herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay a little longer. Collins Mater will be very glad of your company, I am sure.”

“I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied Elizabeth, “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturnsday.”

“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told Collins Mater so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Bennet Mater could certainly spare you for another fortnight.”

“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.” 

“Oh! Your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as NeoLondon, for I am going there early in Sextober, for a week. In the ferflivver that is a journey of only a few hours, whereas it is a bumpy day’s ride in a camel carriage.” 

“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan.” 

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Where shall you change camels? Oh! Lamark, of course. If you mention my name at the Flying Llama, you will be attended to.” 

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey, and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth found tiresome. She hoped to be invited to enjoy the holodeck again, but refused to bring the subject up for fear of appearing to be a poor country lass who had never before encountered such delights. Of course, that is what she was, but she disdained to leave such an impression. At last Lady Catherine herself offered her guests the entertainment. 

“How about a last turn in the holodeck?” she said. “A safari in Africa would be diverting.” 

“Could we, perhaps, have another visit to the English countryside,” Elizabeth emboldened herself to ask. Africa would no doubt have been exciting, but the English countryside had infiltrated Elizabeth’s spirit and she longed to enjoy its fresh air one last time.

“Another fox hunt!” said Lady Catherine with satisfaction. “Excellent idea!” 

The guests were more comfortable in the saddle this time, comparing virtual horseback favorably to actual camelback. When the rest of the party became engaged in the pursuit of the quarry, Elizabeth hung back and turned her horse onto a side path, where she could enjoy the air, the woods and her own reflections.

Riding alone in that virtual countryside, she was tempted to imagine herself in the England of several centuries previous. How might her situation have been different then! She thought wistfully. In such a world, a man like Darcy might love a girl like Elizabeth and the world would think it nothing strange. In that world, she knew from old Earthan novels, lads and lasses were expected to fall in love while they were both equally innocent and unexperienced, and  expected to breed with a single person for an entire lifetime. What a pretty thought! But, of course, that was only fiction. The reality was not so pretty, Elizabeth remembered. By the time her ancestors had left the Earth, breeding contracts, “marriages”, had lasted an average of only 10 years, ending frequently in bitterness and sometimes in violence. That was no way to raise children, thought Elizabeth, grateful, for once, for the wisdom of Titan’s governance. On Titan, we provide stability for our children with amicable breeding partnerships and still have time for love, though later in life.

For those that are able to find an amicable breeding partner, that is.

As for the rest…

Until recently, Elizabeth had never seriously doubted that she, Jane and her sisters would all be able to find financially stable, pleasant and genetically well-endowed co-parents. Now, however, she was plagued with doubts. Did their genomes really harbour a dark secret? Were they all doomed to be partnered with men flawed enough to be desperate? Or, worse still, not to be partnered at all? With the precipitous mortality rate of miners and astronauts, even desperate men were in short supply. Would they be forced to leave the safety and familiarity of Titan to take their chances on the wild frontier of the new colonies? And had she proudly and piously dismissed the only opportunity she would ever be offered for a normal life?

She thought again of Darcy’s letter, which she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She meditated on every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. Yes, he could have provided her the opportunity to stay in Titan, but at what cost? His love was of that excessive kind that could only end in tragedy. To have a normal life would be to pair with someone who admired and respected her, not to enter into a frightening pact of passion with a man would sacrifice all he valued and esteemed for the chance to breed with her.

Her case was hopeless, she was sure. No rational man would take her, and to partner with an irrational man was to play dice with the devil. Dismissing thoughts of her own future, she thought about her sisters.

Poor Jane! Squire Darcy’s explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His admiration was proved to have been sincere and appropriate, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived by some quirk of her family’s genetic makeup!

Jane, however, was so nubile, so motherly and so accomplished in the arts of running a household, that she would surely be able to contract with some man who, being beget with flaws himself, would be willing to accept a future deprived of male offspring. A bleak future, perhaps, but a future, nonetheless.

Catherine and Lydia, on the other hand, had even less to recommend themselves. They were nubile and spirited, but they would do nothing to improve themselves. They refused to take seriously any of the arts that would advertise their genetic fitness, nor would they learn any of the practical skills of running a household. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an astronaut in Mandalay, they would flirt with him. But not even an astronaut would be willing to offer a breeding contract to a lass that was not able to promise him a son.

And then there was Mary. Mary did not even possess the abundant nubility and spirit of her younger sisters. Her only hope had been to attract a serious man who valued intelligence more than well-developed secondary sexual characteristics or charm. But such a man, such an intelligent, earnest and discerning man, would never be desperate enough to accept a lass with a blighted genome.

When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to  tolerably cheerful.

Her unpleasant reflections were interrupted at last by the return of the fox-hunting party. Lady Catherine and her other guests were all in high spirits, having caught and de-tailed a virtual fox in record time. Closing up the holodeck, they returned upstairs and celebrated with cocktails of cactus juice and fermented camel milk.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hanoi again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtsey and hold out her hand to Elizabeth and Charlotte.