One morning, about a week after Bingley’s arrangement with Jane had been formed, Bennet Mater, Elizabeth and Kitty were sitting together in the drawing-room when their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the hum of a ferflivver; and they perceived an unusual ferflivver descending into the landing pad a short walk from the house. The ferflivver was a sporty and elegant model that they had never seen before and was a deep ruby red in color. It answered to none of their relative’s vehicles, nor to that of any paramours of Bennet Mater or Bennet Pater. As they engaged in unfruitful conjectures, they observed a lady step out, accompanied by two robot servants holding parasols over her head, doubly protecting her from the blistering sun and the curious eyes of the inhabitants of Liqua. When finally a knock came at the door and was answered, Lady Catherine de Bourgh stepped in.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Bennet Mater and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more unusually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyship’s entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.
Bennet Mater, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,
“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your mother.” Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
“And that I suppose is one of your sisters.”
“Yes, madam,” said Bennet Mater, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is already breeding, and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man, with whom she will shortly be contracting.”
“You have a rather featureless patch of desert here.” “It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I assure you it has more scrub for the llamas than Senator Lucas’s grounds.” 
“This must be a more inconvenient sitting room in the dusty season, with no trees in front to block the wind.” 
“In the dusty season, we mostly sit upstairs,” Bennet Mater replied, and added, “May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Reverend Collins and Collins Mater well.” 
“Yes, very well. I saw them last night.”
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce some small gift from Catherine, perhaps her renowned camel cheese, as it seemed the only probably motive for her calling. But no gift appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
Bennet Mater, with great civility, begged her ladyship to have some cactus tea; but Lady Catherine declined resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little grotto on one side of your grounds. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.”
“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship the grotto. I think she will enjoy the walk.”
Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol, attended her esteemed guest downstairs. Lady Catherine’s two robot servants, who had waited outside the door, joined them and continued their office of providing shade to their owner as she and Elizabeth strode over the baking sands.
They proceeded in silence, as Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” she said, as she looked in her face.
As they neared the grotto, Lady Catherine began in the following manner: - “You can be at  no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I came.” Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
“Indeed, you are mistaken, madam. I have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here.”
“Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry tone. “you ought to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find me so. My character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me yesterday. I was told that not only your sister was on the point of concluding a most advantageous breeding contract, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bennet, would in all likelihood, be soon contracted to my nephew, my own nephew, Squire Darcy. Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him too so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”
“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, coloring with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”
“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.” 
“Your coming to Liqua, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth coolly, “will rather be a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in existence.” 
“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?” “I never heard that it was.”
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?” 
“l frankness with your ladyship. You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.” 
“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, offered you a breeding contract?” 
“Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.” 
“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But, I have observed, that he has a certain … weakness … for young lasses. Nothing he has ever acted upon, of course, as he is a noble and honourable scion of this family, but a predilection, perhaps, that could make him vulnerable to the arts and inducements of an unscrupulous schemer. You may have preyed upon his weakness and drawn him in.” 
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.” Elizabeth was hot with indignation for being suspected of using arts to encourage an unnatural attraction, but she was determined exude an icy cool.
“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”
“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behavior as this ever induce me to be explicit.”
“Let me be rightly understood. This contract, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never be yours. No, never.  It has already been arranged that Squire Darcy will breed with my daughter. Now what have you to say?”
“Only this; that if that is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me.”
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied: “The arrangement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both would be accomplished by their breeding together, to be prevented by a young woman of inferior genetics, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to any influential family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his tacit agreement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?” 
“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no other objection to my breeding with your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to breed with Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the contract. Its completion depended on others. If Squire Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?” 
“Because honour, decorum, prudence, nay, interest, forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you willfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.” 
“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But, as influential as I know you are are, I believe that Darcy has his own independent influence, and the co-parent of Squire Darcy must have such access to the favors and benefits of the ruling class that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to worry, either for her own future or the future of those she loves.” 
“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you during the last clear season? Is nothing due to me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person’s whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.” 
“That will make your ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.” 
“I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended from forebears with the highest genetic quality – generations without the most trivial genetic deficiency. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young lass without connections or fortune whose family is riddled with genetic flaws. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to breed above your natural class.” 
“In breeding with your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that class. He is a flawless specimen of masculinity; but my DNA is as free from defects as his own; so far we are equal.” 
“To look at your phenotype, one might think so. However, the evidence of your family suggests otherwise. Look at your mother! Look at your uncles and aunts! Do not imagine me ignorant of their conditions.” 
“At least I am able to display all the signs of robust good health,” said Elizabeth, “which is more than you can claim for your daughter.” 
“My daughter is descended from the best bloodlines on Titan,” replied Lady Catherine, bristling. “Her relative fraility is due to the fact that she shared her  mother’s womb with a twin brother, and does not reflect on her DNA.” 
“Perhaps, but perhaps Darcy has reason to believe that I would be more able to produce healthy Darcy descendents than she is.” 
“Rubbish!” Lady Catherine announced imperiously. “Tell me once for all, have you and Darcy agreed to enter into a breeding contract?” 
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment’s deliberation: “We have not.”
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an agreement?” 
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
“Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young lass. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require.”
“And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Squire Darcy to breed with your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make a contract between them at all more probable? Supposing him to believe that I would make a better mother to his children than your daughter, would my refusing to accept his contract make him wish to offer it to his cousin? If he believes me to be superior in this regard to your daughter, then you can be sure that there are other prospects that he would find equally preferable. And for her part, if your daughter is not able to keep the interest of a man like Darcy, who has the security of status to be able choose on the basis of genetic quality alone, I am sure there are other prospects who could be persuaded to accept a little less vigor in a breeding partner in return for the social advantages that would accrue from entering into a contract with her.”
“Impertinent girl!” Lady Catherine scolded. “My desire for Darcy to contract with my daughter is based on an impartial evaluation of the interests of both and the dignity of the family.”
“Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.”
“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous escapade. I know it all; that the young man’s contract with her was a patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncles. The artfulness of your family of vixens knows no limits. And she only 16 years old! Is such a girl to be the aunt of my nephew’s children? Is her breeding partner, the son of his late father’s property manager, to be their uncle? Heaven and earth!—of what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered. “You have insulted me in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house.”
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly incensed.
“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.” 
“You are then resolved to have him?”
“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “have any possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my breeding with Squire Darcy. And with regard to the indignation of the world, if the world would be shocked by such a turn of events, the world deserves to be shocked.”
“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point.”
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of the ferflivver, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”
Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the ferflivver lift off as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
“She did not choose it,” said her daughter, “she would go.” 
“She is a very fine-looking lady! I declare, biological men make the most fascinating women! I wonder,” Bennet Mater said speculatively, “if she prefers male or female paramours.” 
“And her calling here was prodigiously civil!” she continued, “for she only came, I suppose, to continue the acquaintance you had begun in Hanoi. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through Mandalay, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?” 
Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.