Bennet Pater was among the earliest of those who waited on Squire Bingley, making the twenty mile journey on camelback. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring Bennet Mater that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid, she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in embroidering a head scarf, he suddenly addressed her with,

“I hope Squire Bingley will like it, Lizzy, and will take your skill as a testament to your fine genetic heritage.”

“We are not in a way to know what Squire Bingley likes or what standards he uses to judge prospective candidates for motherhood,” said her mother resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”

“But you forget, Mama,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Llewellyn Mater has promised to introduce him.”

“I do not believe Llewellyn Mater will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”

“No more have I,” said Bennet Pater; “and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.”

Bennet Mater deigned not to make any reply; but unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty for heaven’s sake! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times them ill.” 

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty fretfully.

“It is the dust and the dry air,” said Jane sympathetically. “She was made for a gentler climate.”

“So were we all, but she’s lived on Titan her whole life. She should be used to it by now,” remarked Bennet Pater impatiently.

“Yes,” added Mary, thoughtfully, “And she would be wise not to cough in front of any eligible gentlemen, lest they think her incapable of breeding healthy young.”

Kitty scowled. “I’m sure I shall be a very competent breeder,” she responded.

“When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“Tomorrow fortnight.”

“Aye, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Llewellyn Mater does not come back from visiting her paramour till the day before; it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Squire Bingley to her.”

“Impossible, Bennet Pater, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?”

“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if we do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, Llewellyn Mater and her nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself.”

The girls stared at their father. Bennet Mater said only, “Nonsense, nonsense!” 

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?’’ cried he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you there. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great books, and make extracts.” 

Mary strived to say something sensible. “The convention of introductions,” she opined, “allows people to be quickly ascertained of the social status of new acquaintances, so that they need not waste their time making small talk with people of lowly ranks.” 

“Quite so,” her father continued, “Now let us return to Squire Bingley.” 

“I am sick of Squire Bingley,” cried his co-parent.

“I am sorry to hear that; but why did not you tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Bennet Mater perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while.

“How good it was in you, my dear Bennet Pater! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved our girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Bennet Pater, “as long as there are no young men about to hear you”; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his co-parent.

“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so  pleasant I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every day; but to save you girls from exile, we would do any thing. Lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Squire Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.”

“Oh! I am not afraid; for though I am the youngest, I am the most robust,” said Lydia stoutly, with a proud swivel of her sturdy child-bearing hips.

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return Bennet Pater’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to dinner.